>> In this module, we
will introduce BuzzDB, the database system that we'll be building
in this course. We will start with a
basic BuzzDB prototype and gradually expand the functionality
of database system. We will dive into
why we'll be using the C++ programming language
for building BuzzDB. We will then
introduce the idea of transactions in a
relational database system.

>> We will be using the C++ programming
language to build BuzzDB. BuzzDB is our
semester-long project designed to introduce the key components of
a database system. We will start from scratch and gradually extend the
functionality of database system. We will later discuss
about why we are actually using C++ to
build the database system. By the end of the semester, you should understand the key components of a database system. In BuzzDB, our basic data
unit is the tuple class. A tuple maps to a row
or a record in a table. You can think of it as a simple structure holding
a pair of elements, a key column, and
a value column. The key serves as an
identifier like a customer ID. The value column holds the
data associated with that key, like the amount associated with a transaction made
by that customer. Let's next talk about
classes in C++. A class is like a blueprint
for objects designing what data they contain and what operations can
be performed on them. Here's an example
of a book class. In the book class, we
keep track of the title and the author of each
book in class variables. The book class has
a method called display info for displaying
the details of the book. This encapsulation of data
and functionality in a class is an important idea in object oriented programming
languages like C++. Each instance of the book class is known as a book object. We can create objects as shown here and set the attributes of the object attributes like the title and the author
or properties of the book. So they are similar to
columns in a table, methods or actions that
an object can perform, like the display
in for method for displaying the object's
title and author. Classes are super important C++. They allow us to
neatly organize or package data along with the functions that
operate on that data. This makes our code more modular and enhances code reusability
and code maintainability. Using classes, we can
create complex data types, like the book type by combining
variables and methods. Encapsulation is
an important idea in object-oriented programming. It helps protect access to the attributes and
methods of a class. There are two types of access specifiers,
public and private. Public members are accessible from outside the class
by other classes. Private members are only accessible from
within the class. Encapsulation allows us to hide the internal state and
implementation details of a class from the
outside world while providing a controlled interface for interacting
with that object. We can break the database
system into smaller, more manageable classes,
thanks to encapsulation. Each class encapsulates
its own data and methods, making it easier to
understand and maintain, thereby improving the overall modularity of the
database system. At the hoped of our database
system is the BuzzDB class. This class stores tuples
using a vector container in C++ and indexes the tuples
using a map container. We will discuss about
these containers soon, but before that, a quick
note about BuzzDB. We will be sharing
all the versions of BuzzDB in a Github repository. You will need to set up a
C++ development environment on your laptop to play
around with this code. Let's next look at the vector
and map containers in C++. A vector is a dynamic array that can automatically
resize itself. It is a part of the
C++ standard library. In std vector, std refers to the standard
template library, also known as stl in C++. A vector can grow
or shrink in size automatically when elements are added or removed
from the vector. Vectors are very versatile. They can store any type of object and provide random
access to elements. In BuzzDB, we use a vector to
store and retrieve tuples. Here, we are adding
two tuples into the tuples vector and displaying the elements of these
tuples in a for loop. Map in CplusPlus is an associative container
that links keys to values. A map is similar to the
contacts app in a phone where each person's name is
mapped to a phone number. Building this map allows us to quickly find a person's
number using their name. In this code snippet, we are building a map
container with two mappings. We are mapping the key
apple to the value Phi. We are then mapping the key
banana to the value 10. After building this
data structure, we can print the value
associated with the key apple, and that would print Phi. The std map container
in C++ ensures that each key is unique and keeps the keys
in a sorted order. This is similar to the
contacts app where two names cannot be identical and the names are added
alphabetically. In our index, we want to associate multiple
values with a key, so we declare the index as a map container where
the key type is an integer and the value type is actually a
vector of integers. In this way, the
map container is used as an index in
a database system. The index is helpful for quickly retrieving the values
associated with a key. For instance, in
this code snippet, when we print the index
using a four loop, we see that Key 1 is associated
with values 100 and 200, and Key 2 is associated
with value 50. Let's next discuss about some important functions in BuzzDB. The insert function in BuzzDB adds new tuples
to the database, updating both the main table
vector and the index map. Updating the index is
important to support fast retrieval of a specific
tuple based on its key. As shown in this code snippet, we can create a
BuzzDB database by repeatedly calling
the insert method with different tuples. This builds a table upon which all our queries
will run in BuzzDB. The aggregation query in BuzzDB sums up values
associated with keys. This is similar to a
group by clause in SQL. The select group by sum function actually performs the
aggregation query. This method sums up the values
associated with each key, allowing us to summarize
the entire table. In this method, we go over each key in the index
in the first for loop. In the second for loop, we iterate over all the values in the vector associated with that key in the index map and compute the sum of those values. After loading the
database with data, we can run an aggregation query to sum the values for each key. The output of this
program looks like this. The sum of values associated
with Key 1 is 300, for Key 2, the sum
is 50 and so on. In this way, even
this basic version of BuzzDB can already perform
useful data analysis. To wrap up, in this lesson, we presented how we can run an aggregation query using
the BuzzDB database system. We also learned about
several fundamental ideas in C++ like classes,
vectors, and maps.

>> In this lesson, we'll
be diving into why we are using the C++
programming language for building BuzzDB
in the scores. We will particularly focus on its performance and hardware
control capabilities. We'll be comparing
C++ against Python to appreciate the
benefits of using C++. C++ offers superior performance
compared to Python. As a compiled language, C++ code is directly translated
to machine instructions, which the hardware
can execute without the need for an interpreter
as in the case of Python. This direct
translation results in faster execution times and more efficient
resource utilization, both of which are critical
in database systems. Let's consider a simple program. Let's calculate the sum of the first hundred
million integers. Here, we are using
the chronolibrary in C++ to measure the
execution time of the loop. The high resolution clock
marks the start and end times. The difference between
these two timestamps, the diff gives us the total
execution time in seconds. In C++, this function takes around 100 microseconds on a MacBook thanks to direct
compilation to machine code. This type of
performance profiling also allows us to pinpoint slow sections of a
code and evaluate potential optimizations to
speed up the overall system. Now let's do the same
computation in Python. Performing the same
operation in Python takes significantly longer,
around 5.24 seconds. That's roughly 50,000
times slower than C++. This difference highlights
the overhead of Python's dynamic typing
and interpreted execution, which while offer
flexibility and ease of use can also lead to
significantly lower performance. To better understand the
performance difference between C++ and Python, let's consider an
analogy from air travel. Imagine traveling from
Atlanta to New York by air, which typically takes
around 2 hours. Now, compare this to the time it would take to travel to Pluto. That approximately
takes 9.5 years with the fastest spacecraft
ever designed by NASA. So that's like
40,000 times slower. This immense difference in
travel time is comparable to the performance gap we observe
between C++ and Python. C++ offers fine grained control over low level
hardware resources, which allows us to finely tune the performance of
the database system. This includes precise memory
management and the ability to use multi-threading to manage multiple
operations at once. These capabilities are essential for a high performance
database system that needs to efficiently handle queries from multiple
users at the same time. C++ comes with sophisticated memory management techniques. This snippet
demonstrates how to use unique pointer for automatic
memory management in C++. The allocate array
function creates a unique pointer to an
array of a given size. In the main function,
we allocate an array of 1 million integers and initialize each element
with its index value. We then print the value at
the midpoint of the array. The key advantage of using std unique
pointer here is that it automatically
deallocates memory when the pointer
goes out of scope, eliminating the need for explicit memory
management with delete. So this makes the overall code safer and prevents memory leaks, which is a common issue in large software systems,
like a database system. Smart pointers like
std unique pointer, are a part of the memory module in the C++ standard library. We will learn more about smart pointers later
in this course. Multi-threading is
another powerful feature in C++ for hardware control. This example shows how we
can create multiple threads to perform tasks at the same time using the
C++ thread library. The print message function is a simple routine that prints a greeting from each thread identified by a
unique thread ID. The main function initializes a vector to create and
launch multiple threads. Specifically, we
create four threads, each executing the
print message function. After launching the threads, we ensure that they finish their execution by calling
join on each thread. In database systems,
multi-threading allows us for handling multiple queries from different users simultaneously. We will learn more about
threads later in this course. C++ is a statically
typed language, unlike Python, which means that variable types are
known at compel time. This feature helps catch type
pleaded errors early on, enhancing code stability
and performance. For example,
assigning a string to an integer variable results in a compiled time error in C++, preventing such mistakes from
carrying over into runtime. In contrast, Python's
dynamic typing allows flexible
type assignments, but that can lead to
unexpected runtime errors and also introduces inefficiencies
in the overall system. So that wraps up this lesson. In this lesson, we
discussed about why we are using C++ for
building BuzzDB. We also looked at the performance and
hardware capabilities of C++ and compare them against those
capabilities of Python.

>> Up to now, our focus
has been on queries that are used to retrieve and summarize data without
really modifying it. But what if we want to alter
the data in the database? That's where
transactions come in. In this lesson, we will introduce the idea
of a transaction and the asset properties that a relational
database system must support while processing
these transactions. Queries like select, group-by, and sum only read the
data in the database. They do not alter the
data in the database. But what about situations where we need to
change the data? That's where transactions
come into play. Transactions are
crucial for safely making multiple changes
to the database. A transaction is a series of operations in a database treated
as a single atomic unit. Transactions are
crucial for tasks like transferring money
between two bank accounts. Here, it is essential that actions such as debiting
from one account and crediting to
another bank account happen completely to
finish the money transfer. The key idea of a
transaction is that either both the debit and
credit operations complete, or the entire transaction fails and no money
is transferred. There should never be a scenario where money is debited
from one account, but not created to
another account. It is imperative that all parts of the transaction either
complete fully or not at all. This is known as the
atomicity property. Similar to how an atom is
indivisible in chemistry, transactions are indivisible
in database systems. Next, imagine a
transaction transferring $100 from Account
1 to Account 2. Transactions in SQL are initiated with the begin
transaction command. The begin transaction command
alerts the database system that the following operations should be treated
as a single unit. The first update operation
detects $100 from Account 1. The second update
operation deposits the same amount to Account 2. The commit command is then used to finalize the transaction. This command is only executed if all the operations within
the transaction succeed. If one of these
updates fail due to issues like a power failure
or network problems, the entire transaction
is rolled back. This rollback prevents
any incomplete updates, such as money being
debited from Account 1 without actually being
credited to Account 2. Next, let's imagine a
scenario where two clerks are simultaneously processing
deposit transactions to the same bank account. Clerk 1 starts a
transaction to deposit $500 into an account with an initial balance
of say $1,000. Clerk 2 also starts
a transaction to deposit $300 into the same
account around the same time. Without isolation, Clerk 2 might read the balance on
the account as $1,000, the original balance before Clerk's 1 deposit is committed. Both clerks calculate
the new balances based on the same original
balance of $1,000, resulting in two
separate updates, one setting the balance to $1,500 and another one
setting it to $1,300. Depending on the timing
and order of commits, one of the transactions result
could override the other. For instance, if
Clerk 2's transaction commits after Clerk's
1 transaction, the account balance might
incorrectly end up as $1,300 instead of
the correct $1,800. If Clerk 1's transaction commits after Clerk
2's transaction, then the balance might
incorrectly end up as $1,500 instead of $1,800. In both cases, the
balance is incorrect. The isolation property means that transactions
should be executed in a manner where they
are shielded from the operations of other
concurrent transactions, particularly their
intermediate states. Next, let's look at the
durability property. Consider a scenario where
a customer withdraws $500 from account and the bank physically
dispenses this cash. Once the bank gives the
money to the customer, it's crucial that the
transaction record, the deduction of $500 from the customer's account does not disappear on
the bank's side, even if the database system
crashes for some reason. Durability guarantees that once this withdrawal
transaction is committed, the updated balance is permanently recorded
in the database. The database system ensures this by using a technique called
write ahead logging, where the transaction details
are first returned to a log stored on a durable disk before the transaction
is marked as committed. This way, even if there is a system crash right
after the transaction, the contents of the
log on disk can be used to reconstruct the
committed state of the database, thereby preventing
any discrepancies between the bank records and
the actual money given out. These four foundational
asset properties ensure that database transactions
are processed reliably. Atomicity guarantees
that the transaction changes all or nothing, so you don't end up with only a part of the
transaction completed. Consistency ensures that
each transaction only brings the database from one
valid consistent state to another consistent state. Isolation prevents
transactions from interfering with each other, which is crucial for preventing data anomalies when multiple transactions
occur simultaneously. Lastly, durability ensures that once a transaction is committed, it remains so protecting data integrity against
system failures. Together, these asset
properties provide a robust framework
for data integrity and reliability in
relational database systems. The term ACID was first coined by Andreas Reuter
and others in 1983. Though these concepts were discussed as early as the 1970s, the development of
these properties was motivated by the need for reliable data management
that could support the complexities of
multi-user environments. Over the years, the
mechanisms for supporting asset properties
have evolved with new hardware technologies
and user requirements. To recap, in this lesson, we looked at transactions
and how they are used to safely update data
in the database. We also examine the
asset properties that a relational
database system must guarantee while
processing transactions.

>> In this module, we
introduced BuzzDB and how we can run an aggregation query on the BuzzDB database system. BuzzDB is designed to introduce the foundational components
of database systems. We looked at the performance and resource management
capabilities of C++. We also learned about
several key ideas in C++, like classes, encapsulation,
vectors, and maps. We then discussed
about transactions and the asset properties that relational database system must support while processing
transactions.