>> In this module, we
will explore the B+ tree, another powerful data structure used for indexing in
database systems. We will begin by
discussing range queries and why B+ trees are ideal
for processing these queries. Then we will cover the idea
of an ordered index and how B+ trees maintain sorted data to improve
retrieval speed. Next, we will dive into the structure of
the B+ tree itself, examining how it
maintains keys in sorted order and supports
logarithmic search times. We will then look
at notes splitting, a critical mechanism
that B+ trees use to stay balanced and efficient as the size
of the index grows.

>> In this lesson, we will
introduce range queries and explain why
it is challenging to process range queries
using a hash table. Range queries retrieve
all tuples in a table, where a particular column falls within a specified
range of values, hence the term range queries. In contrast, point queries or queries that retrieve
all tuples in a table where a
particular column is equal to a single
specific value. For example, imagine
needing to retrieve all the products priced
between $10 and $20. That is a range query based on the starting
and ending prices. Instead, if you want to retrieve all the
products priced $30, that is a point query. In geometry, a range
refers to a stretch of space between two points
in the number line. Similarly, a range query looks
for all the tuples where the price of product lies
between $10.20 dollars. A point refers to a specific
location in the number line. This idea translates directly to the term point
query where you're looking for a very
specific value like products priced $30. As a pawn query targets
a specific number, it is possible to
answer the query using a constant time
lookup in the hash table. For example, to find
products price $30, we can look up the key 30
in the product hash table. Here, the key is the
price and the value is the IDs of all the product
tuples with that price. For example, products with IDs
103 and 105 are price $30. The values returned
by the lookup will be the IDs of all the tuples
whose price is $30. Unlike point queries, processing range queries using
a hash table is very slow. This is because
the hash table is not ordered with
respect to the key. For example, key 30 is in slot zero and key 12 is in slot two. For finding all the
products priced $10-20, we need to go over the
entire hash table, checking each key to check if it falls within
the desired range. While this method
is straightforward, it is very slow because every entry in the
hash table must be examined. Let's
look at the code. Here, the range
query function in the hash index class
takes two parameters, lower bound and upper bound, which define the range of keys to search for
in the hash table. The function searches through
the entire hash table, checking every slot to see if it contains a key within
the specified range. If a slot contains a key
that falls within the range, the value associated with that key is added to
the results vector. For example, the IDs of the products with that
particular price. After checking all the slots, the function returns
this results vector. We can use this inefficient
range query method in bus DB to process range
queries with a hash index. We just pass the lower bound and the upper
bound values to the range query function in the hash index like 10 and $20. To recap, in this lesson, we presented the idea
of range queries and highlighted the challenges of processing range queries
using a hash table.

>> In this lesson, we will learn about how to build an index ordered with respect to the key so that we can efficiently
support range queries. We will introduce the
B+ tree data structure for building an ordered index. An ordered index maintains data in sorted order
based on the key. So it can support fast range
queries where we need to find all the records where the key falls in a
specified range, like $10 and $20 dollars. In contrast, an
unordered index like a hash table does not maintain
data in sorted order, that's why it cannot
support fast range queries. To process the range
query using a hash table, we need to go over all the
keys in the hash table. B+ tree is a widely
used data structure for building an ordered index. A B+ tree data
structure looks like an inverted tree with the root node at the top and the leaf
nodes at the bottom. A B+ tree is a balanced
tree structure, meaning that all the leaf nodes are at the same distance
from the root node. Here, the height of
the tree is two. All the leaf nodes are two
hops away from the root node. Since all the leaf nodes with the actual data are
at the same level, B+ tree supports uniform
search time for all the keys. Each node in a B+ tree can
hold multiple keys and values. This number is known as
the fanout of the tree. In the tree shown here,
the fanout is three. In practice, the fanout
of a B+ tree can be as high as 100
or even 1,000 keys. Because of this high fanout, the height of the tree with lots of keys is still very small, often just three or
four levels tall. Each node in a B+ tree is
towed as a separate disk page. Due to the tree's high fanout, the height of the tree is small, so to access any leaf node, we only need to do
three discretes. The values in each node vary based on whether it is a
leaf node or an inner node. In a leaf node, the values are
actual values being stored in the index
like tuple IDs. For the non leaf nodes, also known as inner nodes, the values are pointers
to other nodes. In the inner nodes, there are two keys and three pointers. In general, that maps to
K-1 keys and K values. So the inner nodes
have one fewer key. In the leaf nodes, there are three keys
and three values. In general, that maps
to K keys and K values. All the leaf nodes of the
B+ tree are linked to each other to facilitate efficient traversal
during range queries. B+ tree support
fast range queries because they keep the
keys in sorted order, and all the leaf nodes are
linked via sibling pointers. Let's look at the code. We first traverse down the tree to the appropriate leaf node
with the lower bound key. Then we traverse the
leaf nodes using the sibling pointers
until we find a key greater than
the upper bound key. In this way, we gather all the keys that fall
within the range. Unlike a hash table where we need to go over
the entire index, in a B+ tree, we only go over the subset of the index
with the relevant keys. For example, if you are
looking for keys in the range of 6-23, inclusive of those bounds, so the lower bound key is six and the upper bound key is 23, we first traverse
down the tree to the appropriate leaf
node with Key 6. During traversal, we
first compare Key 6 against kKey 20
in the root node. Since six is smaller than 20, we follow that pointer down
to the next inner Node 2. Here we compare it against five. Since six is greater than five, we compare against
the next Key 11. Since six is smaller than even, we follow that pointer
down to leaf Node 3. Here we retrieve the keys six and seven from
the leaf Node 3. We then follow the
sibling pointer to the next leaf Node 4. Here, we retrieve the
keys 11, 17, and 19. Since 19 is still
smaller than 23, we move to the next leaf Node 5. Here we retrieve
the keys 20 and 21. Since 21 is still
smaller than 23, we move on to the
next leaf Node 6, where we retrieve the key 23. Since 24 is larger than 23, we stop the leaf node traversal. In this way, we
gather all the keys that fall within the range, 6, 7, 11, 17, 19, 20, 21, and 23. That wraps up this lesson. In this lesson, we
learned about what is an ordered index
and how to build an ordered index using the
B+ three data structure.

>> In this lesson, we
will learn about how to implement the B+ Tree
data structure in C++. In particular, we'll
be implementing the B+ Tree using a
template class in C++. Template is a powerful feature in C++ that enables
generic programming. By using templates, developers
can create functions and classes that work with any data type without being
rewritten for each type. For example, here, we define a simple add function that can add two elements of any type T. T acts as a placeholder for a data type that is not specified until the function
is instantiated and used. This means that we can
use the add function with any type that supports
the addition operation. For example, we can
instantiate T with integer. So both A and B are integers, the function adds five and
three and returns eight. With T as STD string, the add function
concatenates two strings. Since plus operator is not defined by
default for strings, if you overload
the plus operator for strings to perform
concatenation, then this function would
return hello world. We implement B+ Trees using C++ templates to support
arbitrary key and value types. So key and value types can
be integer and integer, or they can be string
and integer, etc. These placeholder types will be replaced by concrete
types at compile time. Templates allow the creation of a generic B+ Tree that can
handle any key and value type, thereby enhancing code
reusability and maintainability. We do not have to implement a separate B+ Tree class for integer key and value and
string key and value. This illustrates the power of generic programming
using templates. Similar to the add function, the B+ Tree class
template can be instantiated with different
types for keys and values. For example, it could be used to map employee IDs
to their salaries. Here, both employee ID
and salary are integers. When a new employee is hired, their ID and salary are added to the B+ Tree using the insert or update
method in the index. Similarly, it is possible
to do a quick lookup of any employee's salary using their ID through the
get value method. Here's another example of B+ Tree template instantiation
in a retail store context. Here we map product
names to their prices, product names or strings
and prices or integers. For example, we can
insert the price of an Apple iPhone and later
retrieve it when needed. This example shows
how the B+ Tree can be easily used for
different data types. Here's a more interesting
example on using the B+ Tree template for a
ticket reservation system. Here we define a user
defined type ticket key. Ticket key comprises an even
date and a seat number. It is important to define the comparison operator
for the ticket key struct. This comparison
operator is needed to sort the ticket keys
within the B+ Tree. The overloaded comparison
operator compares the even date and seat numbers
and returns a Boolean. Later, we can insert
and query about tickets and the people who bought the tickets
using the index. For example, here we are able to retrieve the
details about who booked seat number 101
on a particular date. This example illustrates how
B+ Trees can accommodate complex user defined data types beyond the basic
data types in C++. In the next version of BuzzDB, we implement an ordered
index using a B+ Tree. The index class supports
inserting or updating key value pairs and performing range queries
over the database. The ordered index class internally encapsulates
the B + Tree. In this lesson, we learned about how to start implementing the B+ Tree data structure
using templates in C++. We discussed about how
generic programming using templates significantly improves code reusability
and maintainability.

>> In this lesson, we will
learn about the structure of B+ tree nodes and how to
insert a key into the B+ tree. A B+ tree is a collection of
leaf nodes and inner nodes. In an inner node, the values
are pointers to other nodes. Since the B+ tree is stored on disk and each node is
stored as a separate page, the pointers to the
nodes are page IDs. In this example, we are mapping keys less than 20 to page 5, keys greater than 20 and
less than 25 to page 10, and keys greater
than 25 to page 15. In inner nodes, the
number of values is one more than
the number of keys. In a leaf node, the values are actual values
like tuple IDs. For example, here we are
mapping one to Tuple 310, two to Tuple hundred and
two and four to Tuple 115. In leaf nodes, the
number of keys is equal to the
number of values. The template based B+ tree will be able to support any
key and value types. For example, we can build an index on a database
configuration file. Here, the key type and value
type are both strings. For example, the
max file size is 10 MB and the default language
is English and so on. Let's refer to each key
value pair as an entry. Here's the code snippet for
a B+ tree entry in C++. Each entry has a key. If it is an entry
in a leaf node, then it has the actual value
in the value variable. If it is an entry
in an inner node, then it has a node pointer, which points to a child
node in the next variable. Here's the code snippet
for a B+ tree node in C++. This structure contains
an S leaf boolean that indicates
whether the node is a leaf node or an inner node. Each node contains a
vector of entries. Each entry is a key value pair where the value is a pointer in case of an inner node or an actual value in
case of a leaf node. Each node has a next pointer
that is used for linking the leaf nodes for sequential reversal while
answering range queries. The process for inserting a key value pair in
the tree is recursive. It starts at the root node and traverses down to the
appropriate leaf node. At each step in the recursion, the function navigates down the tree by recursively
calling itself with the chosen child node
until it reaches a leaf node. Let's say we want to insert Key 22 with the value
Z into the tree. In step 1, we start the recursion
at the root node. We compare 22 against 20. Since 22 is greater than 20, we then compare 22 against 25. Since 22 is smaller than 25, we follow that child pointer. In step 2, we reach the inner node. We compare 22 against 23. Since 22 is smaller than 23, we follow that child pointer. In step 3 of the recursion, we reach a leaf node. Here, we insert Key 22 and value Z at the appropriate position
within the leaf node. Let's look at the
code in bus DB. The insert or update function
takes in a key and a value. It then calls the recursive
function insert or update internal with the root node as the input in the first
step of the recursion. The insert or update
internal function focuses on a particular
node in the B+ tree. In an inner node, the tree must decide which child
node path to follow. Here, the itrator IT itrates over all the
entries in the node. If the key being
inserted is less than the key currently
pointed by the itrator, then we follow that child node
using the next pointer and recursively call the insert or update internal function
with that child node. Finally, after we
reach a leaf node, we perform a binary search across all the keys already
stored in the leaf node. If the key does not exist, we insert it at the correct point to
maintain the sorted order. If the key already
exists in the node, then we just update the value
associated with the key. In this way, the keys are always kept sorted within the nodes. To do binary search and insert the key at the
appropriate position, we first define a
Lambda function comp for comparing keys. A Lambda function is an
anonymous function defined at the point of use rather than
being declared with a name. It is especially useful for short functions that are
not reused elsewhere. The comparator Lambda function takes two parameters; entry, which is an object of entry type from the nodes entries and K, which represents the key with
which we want to compare. The Lambda returns true
if entry.k is less than K. This comparator is used to maintain the order of
keys within the node. We use the SDD lower_bound
function to find the correct position in the nodes entry list where the new key value
pair should be inserted. It searches from the
beginning to the end of the entries vector using the comparator comp to ensure that the
entries remain sorted. The SDD lower_bound
function returns an iterator pointing to the first element that is
not less than the key. Once the correct
position is found, the new key value pair
encapsulated within an entry object is inserted at the position indicated
by the iterator IT. This ensures that the
nodes entry spector remains sorted after
the insertion, which is critical
for maintaining the sorted order of
keys in the leaf node. To recap, in this lesson, we explored the
internals of B+ tree, focusing on the structure of inner leaf nodes and discussed about the
insertion process.

>> In this lesson, we will learn to process range
query using the B+ tree. We will first present a knife-inefficient
technique for processing the range
query using the B+ tree. We will then discuss about a more efficient way to process
the query using the tree. To process range query
using the B+ tree, a naive way is to
just traverse down to the leftmost leaf node and keep traversing across
all the leaf nodes. For example, consider range
query for keys greater than or equal to 19 and less
than or equal to 23. The naive approach is
to traverse down to the leftmost leaf
node in Steps 1, 2, and 3 and then we traverse across all the leaf
nodes in Steps 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9. Now, why is this
approach not efficient? That's because it
always descends to the leftmost leaf with
the smallest key, regardless of the
ranges lower bound, which is 19 in this example. It keeps traversing across
all the leaf nodes, regardless of the
ranges upper bound, which is 23 in this example. Let's look at the code. We traverse to the
leftmost leaf node by continuously moving to
the first child node of each internal node. Entries.front().next. Until
a leaf node is reached, that this leaf is true. Once at the leftmost leaf node, the code then iterates through all the
connected leaf nodes, moving horizontally by following the next pointers
of the leaf nodes. This loop continues until
there are no more leaf nodes. That is while current
node is not null pointer. A much more efficient
way to process a range query is to start
looking at the leaf node that corresponds to
the lower bound of the query range instead of starting from
the leftmost leaf. In this way, we can skip all the irrelevant nodes with keys less than the lower bound. For example, consider the same range query
for keys greater than or equal to 19
and less than 24. Now we traverse down
to the leaf node with 19 in S 1, 2, and 3. And we stop traversing
the leaf nodes when the key is higher
than the upper bound. So we check the leaf
nodes in Steps 4 and 5 and stop the traversal
when we see key 24, which is greater than 23. This targeted traversal reduces the number of B+
three nodes visited. As each node is a page on disk, this means we retrieve fewer pages from disk
to answer the query. There are two steps for
efficient range processing. First, we do a
vertical traversal navigating down the tree
from the root node, moving through the
internal nodes by comparing the lower bound
with the key at each node. This continues until the
leaf level is reached, ensuring that the traversal is as direct and
minimal as possible, targeting only the
relevant nodes. So the vertical traversal
consists of Steps 1, 2, and 3. Once we reach the leaf node, we do a horizontal traversor across all the
linked leaf nodes. We stop the traversal
when the key is larger than the upper bound so this horizontal
traversal captures all the keys that fall
within the specified range, leveraging the sorted
ordering of keys in the tree, which is ideal for
processing a range query. So the horizontal
traversal consists of steps four and five. This targeted traversal reduces the number of nodes visited, as each node corresponds
to a page on disk. This means we
retrieve fewer pages from disk to answer
the range query. To recap, in this lesson, we explored two
different ways for processing a range
query using a B+ tree. We learned about how
a B+ three provides an efficient access path for retrieving a subset of key value pairs
stored in the index.

>> In this lesson, we
will discuss about how to split a BPlusTree
node when inserting a key into the node that causes the node's key count to
exceed its maximum capacity. Node splitting is important for maintaining the balance
of the tree so that all the leaf nodes are at the same level and can be accessed quickly in
logarithmic time. In the next version of buzzDB, we keep the keys and values in separate vectors
in the node struct. The BPlusTree class
is defined using a template to handle generic
key and value types. Both leaf nodes and inner
nodes have a vector of keys, but they differ in their values. While leaf nodes have
a vector of values, inner nodes have a
vector of node pointers. During insertion, if
adding a key into a leaf node leads to
exceeding its capacity, then the leaf node must be split to maintain
the tree's balance. For example, let's say
we want to insert key 8 with value Z in this tree. We traverse down through the appropriate leaf
node in steps 1, 2, and 3. Now, this node already
contains three keys. When we try to add another key, we break the requirement that all leaf nodes can only
contain at most three keys. So we must split this node. This split involves redistributing
keys into a new node. Here, we put keys 5 and 6 in one node and keys seven
and eight in another node. Next, we also need to
add a separator key, which is key seven in this
case, in the parent node. It is possible that adding
the separator key in the parent node
leads to exceeding the capacity of the
parent node as well. For example, here, adding
seven in the parent node leads to a split as the maximum number of keys
in an inner node is two. So this split involves redistributing the keys in the
root node into a new node. Here, we put key 7 in one node and key 25
in another node. The new root node will
have two children, and the single
promoted median key 20 becomes the only key
in the new root node. Effectively, this increases the height of the
BPlusTree by one. In this way, we keep
the tree balanced by increasing its height uniformly
across all the parts. Let's look at the
code in buzzDB. After insertion, if a node capacity exceeds its capacity
determined by max keys, then the node is split. This involves modifying
the tree structure, potentially propagating
changes up the tree as needed. During insertion,
we keep track of all the nodes visited along
the way in the path vector. This path vector is crucial for backtracking up the tree
during a node split operation. The std upper-bound function finds the child
node that should be traversed next by determining the first key that is
greater than the input key. For example, here, the path
vector contains nodes X, Y, and Z that were accessed
during the search for the correct position
to insert a new key 8. This path helps in
revisiting those nodes, particularly when
node splits need to be propagated
back up the tree. During backtracking, we start from the leaf node
Z where the split occurred and move
up the tree using the recorded path vector
to nodes Y and X. We update the parent
nodes as necessary to accommodate new separator
keys from split nodes. Once the correct leaf
node is reached, we determine the
precise insertion point using std lower-bound. This helps keep the nodes
key in sorted order. If the key exists, its value is updated. If not, the new key value pair is added in its sorted position, maintaining the ordering
of keys within the node. If the insertion causes the node's key count to
exceed its maximum capacity, a split is triggered. The node is divided into
two with half the entry staying in the original node and the rest moving to
a new leaf node. Here, we move the second half of keys and values
to a new node. We also maintain
the next pointers between the leaf nodes. The next pointer
of the new node is set to the next pointer
of the old node, effectively inserting it into the link list of leaf nodes. This split might
propagate up the tree. In inner nodes, the split redistributes the
children pointers. A median key is identified
and moved up to the parent node to act
as a new separator key. This ensures that the
tree remains balanced. If the parent node is full as a result of
receiving the new key, it must also be split. While backtracking, we use the path vector to
determine the parent node. When the insertion of the
median superior key into the parent node causes the parent node to
exceed its capacity, the split recurses up the tree. At each step in the recursion, we remove one node
from the path vector. This recursion can go all
the way up to the root node. If the split occurs
at the root node, as there is no parent
node by definition, the path vector is empty. In this case, a new root node is created with the median key. This new root node has a single promoted median
key as the only key. It will have two children, one bound to the old root node, and another bound to
the newly created node. Effectively, this
increases the height of the tree by one. This keeps the tree
balanced by increasing its height uniformly
across all the parts. To recap, in this lesson, we discussed about how a
plus three maintains balance even after a node split. This is crucial for maintaining the logarithmic
time complexity for searches and ensuring that range queries are
efficiently processed.

>> In this lesson, we will learn about how to adapt the in-memory B+ tree to an on-disk B+
tree to ensure durability. We will discuss about
how an on-disk B+ tree supports key lookups with a
small number of discretes. There are two important reasons for coming up with
an on-disk B+ tree. An on-disk B+ tree is important for indexing
large tables, unlike an in-memory
B+ tree index that is constrained by DRAM size, on disk B+ tree
index can leverage the large storage
capacity of disk, so we can index large tables. Another reason why
we need an on-disk B+ tree is to ensure the
durability of the index. In memory B+ tree
disappears when the system crashes because
DRAM is volatile. We must rebuild the index when the database
system restarts, for instance, from
a power failure. To avoid rebuilding
all the indices when the system restarts, we need an on-disk
B+ tree that remains intact even after the system
shuts down and restarts. So how do we adapt the B+
tree for disk storage? First, we must align
the node size of the B+ tree with the
size of a disk block, which is typically
four kilobytes. This ensures that each node
maps to one page on disk. Second, we need to serialize
the contents of the in-memory node into a format
suitable for disk storage. This serialization
involves translating in memory pointers into file offsets so that the node can be stored and read
back from a file on disk. Understanding the space
each node occupies is important for aligning
it with disk block size. This formula shows the
size of a node struct with m keys and n+1 values. Each key and value takes
four bytes respectively. We have to reserve space
for an additional value, so that's four bytes. Additional node metadata
takes up to nine bytes. The overall formula
is 8*m+13 bytes. Now we can calculate
the number of keys that a node can
store using this formula. If the page size
is four kilobytes, then m is around 510 keys. If it's an SSD and the disc
page size is 16 kilobytes, then m is around 2046 keys. This is how we align a B+ tree
node with a page on disk. B+ trees are really
wide and super short in practice because
of their high fanout. If the fanout is 510 and the
page size is four kilobytes, then a tree with just
three levels can have 510 into 510 leaf nodes. This roughly maps to a one GB
file with 132 million keys. If the tree has four levels, then that maps to half a terabyte file
with 67 billion keys. Next, let's look at
the serialization and deserialization
aspects of a B+ tree. The serializeNodeToBytes
function takes a disc node object
and converts it to a byte stream represented
as a vector of bytes. We iterate over each
key in the node, converting them to bytes and
opening them to the vector. We do the same for
values and so on. Since node pointers cannot be directly returned
to a byte stream, we convert them to
file offsets that indicate where in the file
the node can be found. The serialization
process ensures that all the
components of the node are linearized into
a contiguous block of memory ready
for disk storage. Deserialization is the
inverse of serialization converting a byte stream back into a structured
in-memory node. This process is important
when a node needs to be loaded back into
memory from disc. The deserialization node from bytes function takes
a byte stream as input and converts it back into an in-memory
disc node object. The function uses
SDD MM copy to copy bytes directly into the
target data structures. If key or value types are
variable in size like strings, then the serialization and deserialization
functions would need to accommodate this by additionally storing
metadata about the sizes within
the byte stream. The file layout shown
here represents how B+ tree nodes
can be stored in a file on disk with each node occupying a
fixed-sized disk block. The file offset indicates
the starting position of each node in the
file measured in bytes. The offsets increase in
multiples of the disc page size, which is four kilobytes here. As nodes are stored one
after another in the file, it is easy to calculate the
disc offset for a node. More importantly, the
offset-based storage also allows for random access of
nodes like nodes 1 and 5, which is crucial
for tree operations that may need to access various parts of
the tree quickly without reading all the
intervening nodes from the file. Next, let's look at how
to minimize the number of disk operations with
an on-disk B+ tree. We can reduce the number of
disc operations in two ways. First, we can use a
buffer manager to cache frequently accessed
B+ tree notes in memory, like the root node and
its immediate children. For example, here
we have a bunch of notes cached in DRAM. The high fanout of B+ trees reduces their overall height to typically three
or four levels. To access a random key, since the top 2 levels are
already cached in memory, we only need to read the
leaf node from disk. For example, while looking
up a key in node 4, we first need to access
node 1 and node 5. But as nodes 1 and 5 are already there in the
in memory buffer pool, we only need to fetch
node 4 from disk. Second, we can write
back updated notes back to disk lazily only
when it is necessary. For instance, when
the nodes page has to be evicted
from the buffer pool. Lazy writing helps
improve performance and reduces disc wear by lowering the frequency
of disc writes. For example, we can
evict node 2 from the buffer pool only when we run out of space in
the buffer pool, and if node 2 has been modified. If node two has not been
modified and was only read, then we can just discard it from the buffer pool and not
even write it back to disk. B+ trees work really
well on a disc. This is not a surprise. In fact, B+ trees were
designed for storage on disk. It's a natural generalization of a binary search tree to disk. As all the leaf nodes are at the same height,
all the lookups, insertions, and deletions involve a predictable number
of disc reads and writes. The high fanout of B+ trees
reduces their overall depth, thereby decreasing the
number of disc operations needed for most operations
during vertical traversals. Lastly, the link nature of leaf nodes facilitates
efficient scans for range queries and eliminates loading
unnecessary pages from disc. In this lesson, we explore
how to adapt the B+ tree to disk so that we can achieve
scalability and durability. We discussed about
the serialization and deserialization logic
and highlighted how all the B+ tree
operations typically involve only a small number
of disc reads and writes.

>> In this module, we
learn the fundamentals of B+ trees and how they support efficient data retrieval
in database systems. We introduced the idea of range queries and
discussed about how B+ tree efficiently supports these range queries by keeping
keys in sorted order. We then went over the
structure of the B+ tree, focusing on the structure of the nodes and the recursive
key insertion process. We also learned about
nodes splitting, which is crucial for maintaining the logarithmic
time complexity for searches and ensuring that range queries are
efficiently processed.