>> In this module, we will learn about
indexing data using a Hash Table
to speed up queries. We will learn about indexing
data for quicker retrieval without searching
through every tuple in the table while
answering a query. We will then discuss
about hash tables, a widely used data structure
for indexing data. We will also learn about
sophisticated policies for building hash tables
like double hashing.
 
>> In this lesson, we
will focus on indexing in database systems and the relevant indexing
data structures in C++, map and unordered map. We will then present a custom hash index
data structure that we will build from
scratch for bus DB. Indexing in databases is
similar to an index in a book. It allows for quick
data retrieval without needing
to search through every tuple in the
table sequentially, like finding all users
based in Atlanta. The term index comes from the Latin word indicare which means to indicate or point out. In books, an index helps readers locate information quickly
without reading every page. Similarly, a database index helps locate relevant
tuples efficiently. In C++, STD map and STD unordered map are two primary containers
used for indexing. Map maintains key value pairs in a sorted order using a
balanced binary search tree. This ordered nature ensures that operations such
as searching for a key and inserting a key have a logarithmic
complexity of log in, where N is the number
of keys in the index. Map is particularly useful for queries where the order
of the keys is crucial, like finding products in
a particular price range. On the other hand,
unordered map uses a hash table for storing the
keys in no particular order. Unordered map supports faster searching and
insertion operations with an average case
complexity of O(1), which is constant time independent of the
number of keys CN. However, it also has a worst
case complexity of O(N), which can happen when
we need to go over all the keys in the hash table to find the key in
the worst case. The primary differences
between map and unordered map lie in their ordering,
implementation, and performance. While STD map is ordered and ensures
that keys are sorted, unordered map does not
maintain any order. STD Map is implemented
using a binary search tree, ensuring ordered access and
efficient range queries, like finding all the
employees earning a salary between $5,000 and $10,000, while unordered map uses a hash table that
provides faster access, but at the cost of more
expensive worst case scenarios. In buzzDB, we have
so far directly used the standard STL unordered
map to build an index. To learn more about the
internals of the index, let's start building our
own index data structure. To start off, let's first write a hash index class that just wraps around
the unordered map. We will later build
our own hash table. The hash index class
has two methods, the insert or update method that supports inserting a new
key value pair or updating the value associated with the
key if the key is already present in the index and
the get value method, which supports
retrieving the value associated with a given key. This simple indexing
structure is sufficient for managing
key value pairs in buzzDB. The hash index is integrated
during the scanning phase of buzzDB where each tuples key
value pair is processed. In the scanned table
to build index method, we iterate over
pages and tuples, extracting key value pairs and inserting them
into the hash index. This is how we build the index. In this version of buzzDB, the hash index class still uses the unordered map to
manage key value pairs. In the next version, we will
replace unordered map with a custom hash table
so that we can learn about implementing an index
structure from scratch. To recap, in this lesson, we discussed about
indexing in C++. We learned about the
implementation details and differences between
map unordered map. We also discussed about
how we are getting started with developing a
custom hash table for duzzDB.
 
>> In this lesson, we will
focus on the mechanics of storing and retrieving key
value pairs in hash tables, the role of hash functions and handling collisions
in a hash table. By the end of this
lesson, you should have a clear understanding of how a hash table data
structure works. You can think of a hash table as a cabinet of drawers where each drawer represents
a slot for storing a piece of paper with a key
and the associated value. A hash table allows
us to quickly access data without having to sequentially search through
each slot in the cabinet. For instance, let's say we are searching for key
15 in this table. Instead of
sequentially searching all the 10 slots from 0-9, we try to locate key 15
directly in the hash table. This direct access
is possible by using the same hash function for storing and finding keys. To store data, we apply
the hash function on the key to calculate which slot the key value pair
should be stored in. For instance, here, let's say the hash function is key mod 10. The mod operation
returns the reminder, that is what remains after
you divide the key by 10. It is like doing
division but instead of carrying about how many
times 10 fits into key, you care about what's
leftover after you have divided key by 10 as
much as possible. Here, the key is 15. If you divide 15*10
since 10 times 1 is 10, the remainder is 5. So 15 mod 10 is 5. So we go to the fifth slot in the array and store the
key value pair there. As this slot is unoccupied, it is fine to put the key
value pair in that slot. Let's next insert the key
26 with a value grape. Now, 26 mod 10 = 6
because 26 is 20 + 6. So we place this key
value pair at slot 6. Let's next insert the key 56. Now, 56 mod 6 is
also 6 because 56 is 50 + 6 so we try to place this
key value pair at slot 6. Since slot 6 is already occupied we need to
find another slot. When two different keys
hash to the same slot, it is known as a hash collision. A common technique to handle collision is just to move on to the next slot and keep searching until an
empty slot is found. So we move on to the next lot, slot 7 and place
the key 56 there. To retrieve data from
a hash table we apply the same hash function on the key to find the
expected drawer. Let's say we need to find the value associated
with key 15. We do 15 mod 10, and the remainder is
5 so we check slot 5. As the slot contains key 15, we just retrieve the key
value pair from that slot. Let's say we next need to find the value associated with 56. We do 56 mod 10 and
the remainder is 6, so we check slot 6. Now slot 6 contains key 26, which is not what
we are looking for. So we move on to the
next slot, slot 7. As slot seven contains key 56, we retrieve the key value
pair from that slot. Let's say we next need to find the value associated with 86. We do 86 mod 10 and
the remainder is 6, so we check slot 6. Now, slot 6 contains key 26, which is not what
we are looking for. So we move on to the
next lot, slot 7, and slot 7 contains 56, which is also not what
we are looking for. So we move on to the next
slot 8 and slot 8 is empty. The empty slot means that key 86 is not present
in the hash table. So the overall algorithm
is to sequentially check the next slots until
an empty slot is found, even wrapping around to the beginning of the
hash table if necessary. So far we have used a simple mod function
for hashing keys. The hash function is a very important component
of the hash table. It maps keys into array indices. A simple hash function
involves the modulo operation, where the key is divided
by the number of available slots and the
remainder determines the index. This simple hash function
ensures that every key maps to a slot within the
bounds of the hash table array. It distributes the keys
all across the array. When different keys
hash to the same index, it is known as a collision. A common technique to handle
collision is linear probing. With linear probing, if the
intended slot is occupied, we check the next slot and so on until an empty slot is found. So if slot 8 is taken, we check slot 9, slot 0, slot 1, and so on until the
empty slot 2 is found. With linear probing,
the formula to compute the index of
the next slot to look up is given as the hash of
key plus K mod table size. Here, the hash of key is the initial hash
function applied to the key and K is the number of steps we are moved from
that initial slot. So we increase K by one each time we move
to the next lot. K is 0, 1, 2, and so on until we
find an empty slot. As this formula is linear
with respect to K, it is known as linear probing. Now let's look at the code. The hash entry struct is a fundamental component
in our hash table. It stores two pieces
of information, a key, and a value, both of which are integers. The hash table is a vector of optional hash entry objects. It is simply array
of drawers where each drawer can hold a
hash entry or be empty. The std optional
wrapper allows us to handle empty slots in our
hash table gracefully. The constructor
initializes the hash table with a fixed capacity
of 100 slots, so we can only store 100 key value pairs
in this hash table. Let's next look at the insert or update function for inserting a new key value pair or updating the value associated with the key already
stored in the table. This function begins
by calculating the index for the key
using the hash function. If the target slot is empty, we insert a new hash entry. If the slot already contains
an entry with the same key, we then simply update
the existing value. In case of collisions where the initial slot is occupied
with a different key, we do linear probing. We check subsequent slots in a linear sequence
by incrementing the index until an
appropriate slot is found or we return
to the starting point. If we return to
the starting point then the hash table
itself is full. The G value method
retrieves the value associated with a specific
key from the hash table. It also starts by calculating the initial index using
the hash function. The method then checks
if the current slot contains the desired key and
returns the value if found. If the slot does
not match the key, the method uses
linear probing to examine subsequent
slots until the key is found or an empty slot is found indicating that the
key is not in the table. If the key is not found, the method returns minus one signaling that the key is
not found in the index. Let's next look at the
computational complexity of the hash table operations. Both insert and find operations have an
average case performance of O of 1 where there are no collisions
or few collisions. O of 1 or constant time complexity means
very fast operations, regardless of the number of key value pairs N in the table. However, the performance
of these operations can degrade to O of N under
very high collision rates. High collision rates can
come from high occupancy in the hash table or when a
bad hash function is used. For example, if you use
a bad hash function like hash of key always
maps to slot Phi, then all the entries will crowd in one area
of the hash table. This phenomenon is
known as clustering, and it leads to worst case linear train performance
in the hash table. To recap, in this lesson, we covered the fundamentals
of hash tables, including their
structure, the importance of hash functions and
collision handling. We will next learn about
techniques to better handle collisions and avoid
the clustering problem.
 
>> In this lesson,
we will discuss about how to delete keys in the hash table and how to track positions of keys inside the hash
table for debugging. Position tracking
will help us better understand the efficacy of our
collision handling policy. Removing a key from the
hash table is a bit tricky. Let's assume that this
is our hash table and we are trying
to find key 32. Now, 32 mod 10 is two. So we start searching
for slot 2. Slot 2 does not contain key 32, so we move on to slot 3, then slot 4 until we reach
slot 35 where key 32 is found. Let's say we next want
to delete key 13, 13 mod 10 is three, so we look at slot 3. Slot 3 does contain key 13, so we just go ahead and remove this entry
from the hash table. When we remove key 13
from the hash table, that leaves a hole in the table that disrupts
the probing sequence. Let's say we again
try to find key 32. Now 32 mod 10 is two, so we start searching at slot 2. Slot 2 does not
contain the key 32, so we move on to slot 3, but slot 3 is now empty, so we give up on the search and return that the
key is not found. This is not correct since key 32 is still there in slot 5. To solve this whole problem, one solution is to rehash
all the keys from scratch again into another
empty hash table so that the whole disappears. But this approach is super slow because we need to hash
all the keys again. A simpler solution is to
mark an entry as deleted by setting a flag to zero without actually removing
it from the table. This helps preserve
the integrity of the probing sequence. For example, let's
say we try to find key 32 after deleting key 13. Now, 32 mod 10 is two. So we start searching at slot 2. Slot 2 does not contain key 32, so we move on to slot 3. Now slot 3 is not empty
but marked as deleted, so we move on to slot
4 and then slot 5, where we find key 32. This is exactly what we want.
Let's look at the code. In the updated
hash entry struct, we add an exit flag
to mark an entry as deleted without actually
removing it from the table. By default, the excess flag is set to true in
the constructor. When we lazily delete the key, we set it to false signaling that the key is
deleted in the index. To enhance memory efficiency, let's switch from
using a vector to a static sized array for
storing the hash table entries. By allocating the
memory upfront, we reduce the
overhead associated with dynamic memory
allocations inside the vector. When a vector's capacity is exhausted and more
entries need to be added, it allocates a new memory block, copies the existing
entries to the new block, and deallocates the old block. This is conceptually similar
to the rehashing process. In the next version of bus DB, we introduce position
tracking in the hash table. Each entry locks its position within the array upon insertion, allowing us to understand the distribution and location of entries within the table. Position tracking
provides deeper insights into the collision
handling policy. When inserting or updating
entries in the hash table, we record the entry's position. This is done by checking if the given slot is
occupied, and if not, we insert the new entry with its corresponding index
marked as its position. As we discussed earlier, linear probing can lead
to a clustering problem. For example, if the hash
function is key mod 10 and we insert a set of keys that hash
to the same index like 2, 12, 22 and 32 and so on. This will result in
these keys forming a contiguous cluster
in the hash table. This clustering
increases the likelihood of collisions as
the clusters grow, making subsequent
insertions more prone to conflict and compounding
the clustering effect. It also makes searches for non existent keys like
key 31 inefficient as it requires traversing the entire cluster thereby
degrading performance. To recap, in this lesson, we looked at how
to delete keys in the hash table and how
to track positions of keys inside the
hash table for understanding the efficacy of our collision handling strategy. We will next learn
about techniques for avoiding the
clustering problem.
 
>> In this lesson, we
will discuss about more sophisticated policies for handling collisions
in hash tables. Specifically, we will focus on quadratic probing
and double hashing. Quadratic probing introduces
a new way to handle collisions by using
a quadratic function to determine the
next probe position. Unlike linear probing, where steps are sequentially
taken through the table, quadratic probing uses the
formula K^2 for the Kth probe, jumping over significantly
larger intervals. As we will see, this helps in reducing
primary clustering, thereby improving
the distribution of keys across the
entire hash table. Let's look at an example. Let's say we want to insert 2, 2 mod 10 is 2, Slot 2 is empty, so we just place
the key at Slot 2. Let's next try to insert 12. 12 mod 10 is also 2, but Slot 2 is not empty. Quadratic probing calculates
new probe positions by adding square values of the iteration number
to the original index, then taking modulo
the table size. Here, the iteration
number K is 1. So 2+K^2 is 2+1^2, which is 3. So we check Slot 3 and place the key
there as it is empty. Let's next try to insert 22, 22 mod 10 is also 2, but Slot 2 is not empty. So we next probe the
slot with Index 2+1^2. Slot 3 is also not empty. Now we next look
at the slot with index 2+2^2 because the
iteration number is 2. This is 16 mod 10, which is 6, so we place
the key in Slot 6. Quadratic probing
is different from linear probing in that
instead of looking at Slot 4, we immediately jump to Slot 6. Let's next try to insert 32. We probe Slots 2, 3, and 6, all of them are occupied. So we next probe the
slot with Index 2+3^2. This is 11 mod 10, which is 1. So we place the key in Slot 1. In this manner, quadratic
probing spreads out the entries across the entire hash table
more effectively, thereby eliminating the
primary clustering problem. Here's how we implement
quadratic probing in code. This function attempts to insert a new key or update an existing one by moving to the next available slot according to the quadratic
probing sequence, ensuring that each
collision moves further away from the last,
reducing clustering. Here, the attempt counter is K, so we are adding K^2 to the
index in each iteration. Unlike linear probing,
quadratic probing spreads entries across the
hash table more uniformly. This spread out distribution also facilitates
faster searches, minimizing the number of
probes required to find a key compared to dense
clusters in linear probing. Although it reduces
primary clustering, quadratic probing can still
lead to secondary clustering. This occurs when different keys hash to the same initial index, follow the same probe
sequence leading to potential performance
issues similar to those seen with smaller clusters
in linear probing. For example, keys 2, 12, 22, and 32 form a
secondary cluster. Let's next look
at a solution for this secondary
clustering problem. Double hashing introduces
a second hash function HASH2 to compute the probe step, creating a unique probe
sequence for each key, thus greatly reducing the
chance of second re-clustering. The probe sequence is determined
by the formula HASH1 of key plus K into HASH2(KEY)
mode table size. Here, HASH2 is a different
hash function from HASH1. For instance, HASH2 can be 1
plus KEY mod TABLE_SIZE-1. It is very important
for HASH2 to not be the same as HASH1. If both the functions
are the same, then the secondary
hash function HASH2 does not provide a unique
sequence for probing, which is the main advantage
of double hashing. Let's revisit the same
example of inserting keys 2, 12, 22, and 32. Let's say we want to insert 2, HASH1 is just 2 mod 10, which is 2, HASH2 is 1+2 mod 9, which is 1+2, which is 3. Since Slot 2 is empty, K is 0, and we don't
really need HASH2 here. So we just place
the key at Slot 2. Let's next try to insert 12. Here, HASH1 is again 2, but HASH2 is 1+12 mod 9, which reduces to 4. Here, the iteration
number K is 1. The overall index is (2+1*4), which reduces to 6. In this way, double
hashing differs from quadratic probing in that it calculates the probe sequence using another hash function. So we check Slot 6 and place the key there as it is empty. Let's next try to insert 22. Here, HASH1 is again 2. HASH2 is 1+22 mod 9, which reduces to 5. The iteration number K is 1, so the overall index is 2+1*5, which reduces to 7. So we check Slot 7 and place the key there
as it is empty. Let's next try to insert 32. Here, HASH1 is again 2. HASH2 is 1+32 mod 9, which reduces to 6. Here again, the iteration
number is only one. The overall index is 2+1*6, which reduces to 8. So we check Slot 8 and place the key there as it is empty. We note that all the
iteration numbers are very small with double hashing
unlike quadratic probing. In this way, double hashing
alleviates the problem of secondary clustering
by providing a unique probe
broth for each key. It reduces the need for
lengthy probe sequences, unlike quadratic
probing and thereby improves efficiency of
hash table operations. In this lesson, we examined two advanced collision
handling policies, quadratic probing,
and double hashing. Quadratic probing helps spread out clusters over
larger intervals, and double hashing almost completely eliminates clustering by using a unique probe
sequence for each key. Both collision handling policies enhance the performance of hash table operations by
avoiding long probe sequences.
 
>> In this module, we learned about
the importance of hash tables in indexing
data for answering queries. We discussed about indexing
containers in C++, std map, and std unordered map. We then covered the
fundamentals of hash tables, including their structure, the importance of hash functions, and
collision handling. We then focused on improving the efficiency of hash
table operations, but reducing the need for really lengthy probe
sequences via double hashing.