In this module, we
will learn about query parsing and
query compilation, the processes that transform SQL statements into
executable query plans. We will start with
query parsing, where SQL like queries
are translated into a structured query plan that the database can execute. Next, we will discuss about query compilation
where the past query is directly transformed to machine code for more
efficient query execution.

>> In this lecture, we will learn about a flexible
approach for executing an arbitrary SQL
query by passing the query string instead of hard coding the query as a function. In particular, we will
discuss about how to parse queries using
regular expressions. Currently, in buzzDB, queries are executed
by hard coding them as functions using
our operator framework. In this next version, we will add support
for executing queries by just specifying
them as a string. Our query strings can range from simple selections
like select column 1, where column 1 is
greater than two, and column 1 is less than six, to more complex
aggregate queries involving grouping and
summing operations. We will extract details about the query from
the query string, like how to filter
the tuples, etc. To extract these details, we will use regular expressions, also known as regex, to identify and isolate different parts of
the query string. For example, in this
parse query function, we are using the
select "Regex" in C++ to extract the columns that are being selected
in the query string. Similarly, other regex patterns are used for detecting
sum operations, group by classes, and
where conditions. This approach to
extracting details from the query string is
known as query parsing. The retrieved details are stored in the query
components struct. This structure includes all the essential components
like select attributes, which is a vector
with the indices of the columns being retrieved. The other components passed from the query include sum operation, which is a boolean indicating if a sum operation is
included in the query, the sum attribute index, which specifies which
attribute to sum, group by, which is a boolean to specify if there is
a group by clause, group by attribute index to identify the
attributes to group by, where condition to verify the presence and the bounds
of the where clause. In this way, the query
components struct contains all the necessary components
to execute SQL queries. We use four regular expressions to identify and extract
the query components. The first one is for extracting the indices of
the selected attributes. The second one is for
identifying a sum operation. The third one is for
locating a group by clause and extracting the
relevant attribute index. The fourth one is a
more complex regex for extracting and validating
the where clause applied on a predicate. A regular expression
or a Ragex is a sequence of characters that
define a search pattern. It is typically used
for string matching. For example, the sum
regex pattern shown here is used to detect and parse the sum operation
within the query. The text sum explicitly
matches the text sum, and the braces match the
literal curly braces. D plus is a capturing group that matches one or more digits. D stands for a digit and plus means one or more occurrences
of the preceding element, which is a digit in this case. This captures the number
inside the braces, which is three in this example. This number identifies which column the sum operation
should be applied on. Once a query is passed, it is useful to print and
verify the query components. The pretty print function
outputs these components in a structured format
and is useful for understanding the
query structure and conditions at a glance. Next, let's look at how to
execute these past queries. The execute query method uses the past query components struct to set up and execute the query. It starts with a
basic scan operation and then dynamically configures additional operations like select and hash
aggregation operators based on the past components. If a query has a where clause, we construct the
predicate dynamically. For each condition
in the where clause, we construct a simple
predicate object. We then combine the
predicates using a complex predicate for
logical and operations. Lastly, we embed the
combined predicate into the select operator to filter tuples dynamically
during the scan. For queries involving
aggregation, we check if sum or group
by has been specified. We then configure the
aggregation function and grouping attributes
accordingly. In particular, we instantiate the hash aggregation
operator to handle the aggregation based on the specified group
by attributes, an aggregation
function like sum. Finally, we execute
the operator chain configured for the given query. We start the execution at the root operator
by opening it. We then continuously fetch and print the tuples generated by the root operator that meet all the specified conditions
and aggregations. The root operator
recursively calls its child operator and so on until we hit a leaf operator with no children like
the scan operator. In this way, we can
dynamically map query strings to operator
chains and execute them. Let's look at an example. Here, we parse the
query string and use the extracted details to
construct a chain of operators. At the base, we have
a scan operator responsible for scanning
all the columns from the table using
a buffer manager. Above the scan, there is
a select operator that filters rows based on
the value of column 1. It selects rows where the
value of column 1 is 2-6. Lastly, at the top, we have the hash aggregation operator. This operator sums the
values of column 1 after grouping the filtered
rows based on column 2. In this way, we parse
the query string and map it to an
operator pipeline. To recap, in this lesson, we explore query
parsing in buzzDB. We discussed about using regular expressions to
extract details from the query string and then
dynamically construct an operator chain based
on the extracted details. In this way, query
parsing improves the flexibility of
query processing in our database system.


>> In this lesson, we will learn about
the limitations of our query interpretation
approach and then present a faster
way to execute queries by compiling them
to assembly instructions. The way we currently execute queries is known as
query interpretation. Query interpretation
begins with parsing the SQL query to extract the
key details about the query. Based on the past details, we next generate a
query execution plan, which is essentially
a chain or tree of operators that specify
how to execute the query. Finally, this query
plan is executed. Let's look at the code
for query interpretation. The query interpretation
function internally uses the parse query and
execute query functions. The parse query function breaks down the query
into components. Based on the parsed components, the execute query creates an operator chain
and executes it. While the query interpretation
approach is very flexible, it is also slow. There are several
sources of CPU overhead. First, each tuple
must pass through multiple operators with
several function calls. This overhead can
significantly affect performance when the query must be executed on
millions of tuples. Second, each tuple must be deserialized using a
generic schema assumption. Third, there is also the
compute overhead associated with dynamic function
dispatch in polymorphism, as we are using pointers to abstract classes
for operators. This dispatch requires
an additional lookup in a virtual table which introduces overhead
for the method call. Besides compute overhead,
there is memory overhead arising from
frequent creation and destruction of
temporary objects in operators such as unique
pointers to fields. Let's next discuss about a faster way to process
queries by compiling them. Query compilation consists of translating the SQL
query string to a hard coded C function and then generating assembly
code from that function. This compiled approach
significantly speeds up query processing, as the database system
can directly run the machine code bypassing the overhead of query
interpretation. The query compilation
function moves away from the operator framework and goes towards a more
hard coded approach. It directly runs all
the operations from scanning through aggregation
in a single function. It directly navigates through all the pages in the table using the buffer manager and processes all the tuples within
the slots in the page. After going to a tuple slot, the function refers to the tuple data as a
raw character string. It then directly deserializes the first field from the
raw string to an integer. This kind of hard coded
deserialization is super fast, but also very rigid, unlike the interbred approach, which is flexible but slow. The function then
filters the tuple based on the lower bound
and upper bound values. If the tuple passes
through the filter, we then update the group
sum for that field value. Lastly, we print all the group sums as the result of the query. The advantages of query
compilation are two fold. First, compiled queries
eliminate the need for interpreting each tuple and passing them through
several operators, thereby saving compute
and memory resources. Second, as compiled
queries run on bare metal, they run significantly faster. Concretely, for
this illustrative grouping based aggregation
query in bus DB, the compiled query is 30 times faster than the
interpreted query. Query compilation also
has some drawbacks. First, the compilation process itself can be time consuming. If the execution time
of the query is short, then the total time to
compile and run it might be actually longer than
just interpreting it. Second, compiled queries are flexible compared to
interpreted queries. Once a query is compiled
into machine code, it is not possible
to easily adjust the compiled query if the
table schema changes, etc. There might be a need
to recompile the query. The cost of frequent
re compilations might exceed the performance gains
from query compilation. To recap, in this lesson, we explore how database systems can enhance performance
through query compilation. By converting SQL queries into machine level instructions, we reduce the overhead
associated with query interpretation and
improve query execution speed. However, there are also
some drawbacks with query compilation such
as reduced flexibility.


In this module, we covered
the steps that turn SQL like queries into actionable
query execution plan with relational operators. We looked at query parsing, where we use regular expressions to extract the details from the Query string and then
dynamically construct an operator chain based
on the extracted details. Query parsing improves
the flexibility of query execution in SDP. We then exploit query
compilation where past queries are transformed
into low level machine code, thereby avoiding the
overhead associated with query interpretation and
improving query execution speed. However, there are
also some drawbacks with query compilation such
as reduced flexibility.