>> Welcome to CS 6422. This course is all about
building database systems. In this lesson, I will discuss
about the importance of database systems and why you might want to
take this course. A database system is basically a software system designed
for efficiently storing, retrieving, and
manipulating data. Database systems are crucial
across diverse sectors. In banking, database
systems manage everything from accounts
to transactions and loans. In the healthcare
sector, database systems are used for maintaining
patient records, treatment histories,
and scheduling. The airline industry uses database systems for
managing reservations, flight schedules, and
customer relations. E-commerce platforms like Amazon utilize database systems to
manage product catalogs, customer orders, and reviews. These examples illustrate
the importance of database systems in modern
digital infrastructure. So why should you consider
taking this course? If you're curious about how major websites like Amazon
and Google manage data, we will cover that
in this course. We will learn about how
database systems help build scalable web and
mobile applications. We will figure out how
database systems efficiently run complex queries over
really large datasets. Lastly, if you're good enough to write code
for database system, you'll be able to write code for any complex software system. Working on a database
system exposes you to a wide range of
computer science topics from storage management and query optimization to low level indexing structures
and SIMD instructions. The scope of database
systems is very extensive. This course will
take you through many of these interesting topics that make database systems both a challenging
and rewarding field.


>> In this lesson, we will learn about the need for a
relational database system. We will first look at an illustrative
database application based on social media analytics. We will learn about how a simple flat-file
database system is good enough to support this
application's basic functionality. But we will then identify several critical limitations in a flat-file database system
related to scalability, data integrity, and usability that motivate the need for a
relational database system. So let's start with
this application. Imagine we need to
extract insights from social media
data such as trends, sentiments, and
user interactions. Now, we can organize the application's data using three simple flat text files. Users.text can include all
the basic user information. Post.text contains details
of all the individual posts, and interactions.text can
record the interactions between the users and the
post like comments and likes. This design is known as
a flat-file database where the data is organized in a bunch of simple text files. Let's look at the text files. Let's start by looking
at the users.text file. In this file, each line
represents a user. In each line, there are two
fields separated by a comma, the user's name,
and their location. For example, we have entries
like Timothee Chalamet from Paris and Lana Condor
from Los Angeles. This simple flat-file
format is straightforward, but as we will see
later in this lesson, it has several limitations. Let's then look at
the post.text file. The post.text file contains details of all the
posts like post ID, username, and post content. Each post is tagged to a user. Entries in this file
include posts like Timothee Chalamet's
excitement about a new movie and Lana
Condor's beach day. Interactions.text
file tracks how users engage with post, documenting likes, and commands alongside the
respective post ID. So it captures interactions
such as likes by Liu Yifei and commands by Lana Condor connecting user reactions
to specific post. This simple way of
organizing data as a collection of files is known as a flat-file database system.

>> Flat-file database system
has several limitations. First, the flat-file database stores user information
alongside each post, resulting in repeated user
details for every post. For instance, Timothee
Chalamet's multiple posts lists his name repeatedly
wasting storage space. This renancy not only consumes
unnecessary storage space, but also makes the data more
prone to inconsistencies. Next, consider the scenario of deleting a record
from users.text. As our application grows to accommodate
millions of users, deleting a single record might require rewriting
the entire file. This process can take significant amount
of processing time, especially with large files. For instance, removing
a single entry from a one gigabyte text file
could take several minutes. Due to this slow operation, other users will experience delays when axing the database. For example, deleting
a single entry from this file could
take several minutes and that could actually lead to delays for other users
axing the database. Next, let's say we
want to retrieve a set of users from
users.text file, such as users located in Mumbai. The only way to
accomplish this is by sequentially scanning
the entire file. This method is not only slow, but also highly inefficient, especially when dealing
with large datasets. Let's look at the
next limitation. Without coordination,
simultaneous updates by multiple users to
the same text file can result in data inaccuracies. Consider the following scenario. User 1 updates the
name of the first user from Timothee Chalamet
to Xavier Laurent. Meanwhile, User 2 updates the location of the same
user from Paris to New York. Due to lack of synchronization, both updates can occur simultaneously resulting in
the data being overwritten. As a result, the final
state of this user becomes Xavier
Laurent in New York, which does not map to
the updates desired by both User 1 and User 2. So this is an invalid final
state that is resulting from concurrent updates to the same text file
from multiple users. Next, let's consider what happens when there is
a hardware failure. Imagine a disk failure happens during an ongoing operation. For example, imagine a
scenario where we are adding a country column to
all of the user profiles, and that is a disk failure that interrupts the
database update. Upon system restart, simply rerunning the database system
isn't a viable solution. This approach could result in duplicate country
columns for some tuples, leading to data inconsistency
and potential errors. Let's look at the
next limitation to ensure that the data is safe, even if there is a power outage, the data must be stored on disk. This is because DRAM, also known as memory,
is not durable. However, disk is
slower than memory, leading to slower queries
and update operations. So to address this challenge, we will need to cache frequently accessed
database pages in memory so that the number of slow disk operations is reduced. So effective memory
management is critical to support fast
database operations, but it is also crucial to maintain the consistency between the data in memory and the data on disk to
ensure data integrity. A flat-file database does not really contain all of
these optimizations, so that can lead to
more memory conception and slow operations. Lastly, in a flat-file database, performing complex
queries requires users to write custom code. For instance, extracting
all the comments made by Lena Condor across all the post requires writing Python function,
like the one shown here. Writing custom code for each query requires
programming knowledge, and this might not be
feasible for all users. Even for users who
know programming, writing code is time
consuming and error prone. So to conclude in this lesson, we began with an illustrative
database application based on social media analytics. We then explored how
a flat-file database is enough to support this application's
basic functionality. However, we identified several
critical limitations in this flat-file database
system related to scalability and data
integrity and usability, that motivate the need for a
relational database system.

>> In this lesson,
we will introduce the idea of a relational
database system and how relational
database systems address the limitations of
flat-file database systems. In 1970, Ted Codd, a computer scientist at IBM, introduced the idea of
a relational database. His goal was to simplify data management and make
it more accessible. A relational database
is a new way to organize data as a
collection of tables. Each table consists of a
collection of columns and rows, similar to a spreadsheet. For instance, in the user table, each row corresponds
to a user tuple, a user tuple contains all the attributes
associated with that user. For instance, Lana
Condor is located in LA. With a relational database, our social media
analytics application would use three
main tables: users, posts, and interactions. The term relation in
relational database is derived from set
theory in mathematics. A mathematical
relation describes the relationship between
sets of information. For instance, if
we consider a set of students and a set of grades, the relation R links these sets. So the relation R tells us that Alice received
a grade of B, Bob received a grade
of A, and so on. Cots relational data model introduces two layers of design, logical design and
physical design. Logical design is
all about how we model our data as a
collection of tables. This is what application
developers interact with. In contrast, physical
design concerns with how the tables are stored
and indexed on disk. Physical design includes
choosing the storage formats and choosing the indexing
data structures to speed up data retrieval. Application developers do not need to worry about
physical design. They only need to worry
about logical design. Decoupling the logical and
physical database designs offers significant benefits. Thanks to SQL, the
standard query language for interacting with databases, users can perform complex
data manipulation through simple SQL queries. So SQL abstracts the complexity of the underlying
physical design, making it easier for developers
to focus on what the data should do and not really
how it is stored on disk. This separation of logical
and physical database designs allows database
administrators to optimize the backend storage and retrieval processes
without impacting front end user interface
or application logic. So this means that the
database administrators can make improvements
like changing the indexing strategies or
upgrading storage hardware without disrupting the
application's operation or requiring changes
to its code. Let's next go over to important ideas in
logical database design. Primary key and foreign key. The primary key is a
column that serves as a unique identifier for
each row in a table. By ensuring that each row
is uniquely identified, the primary key helps prevent duplicate entries and enables
efficient data retrieval. For example, in the
user's table shown here, the user ID serves as
the primary key that ensures that each user is
uniquely identifiable. A foreign key is a
column in one table that refers to the primary
key in another table, establishing a link
between the two tables. For instance, in
the posts table, user ID acts as a foreign key that connects each post to
a user in the user's table. Foreign key is fundamental for ensuring the integrity
of the data. For example, there cannot
be a post posted by a user whose information does not exist in
the user table. This property is known as
referential data integrity. Together, primary
and foreign keys form the backbone of
logical database design.


>> Let's next discuss about how a relation
database system addresses the limitations of
a flat-file database system. In the relational model,
user details are stored once in the user's table with post referencing
the user's by ID, thus eliminating
data redundancy. For example, all
the posts made by Timothee Chalamet only
contain his user ID, thereby conserving
storage space. Now, let's say we need to update Timothee Chalamet's name
to Sir Timothee Chalamet. With a relational database, it is easy to update his
name by just updating a single row in the user's table instead of updating all the rows
in the post table. The next benefit of a
relational database is that deletion is
quick and efficient. For example, deleting a user is simply a matter of removing a tuple from a table without impacting the
rest of the database. So the deletion operation takes only a few milliseconds
to finish, and does not really disrupt
the queries from other users. Relational databases
also support fast queries by
indexing the database. So let's discuss a little
bit about indexing. Think about your smartphone
filled with hundreds of apps. Without organization, finding a specific app by swiping through all
the screens is hard. Now imagine organizing
all these apps into folders like social, games, and work. This setup allows you to
quickly access what you need, and in the same way, we could actually build
a location based index for speeding up our queries. By organizing the user's
data through indices, we can have a query like SELECT* from users where
location is Mumbai, and that query executes
really quickly. This is because the database
system directly access the relevant users from Mumbai without scanning
through all the users. Indexing is very important for querying large datasets quickly. Let's look at the next benefit of using a relational
database system. Relational databases
are designed to handle multiple users updating
data at the same time. And this is accomplished through the idea
of transactions. Each transaction ensures
that all the updates made by user are fully processed before the next
transaction begins. The database system uses a
concurrency control protocol to ensure that
these transactions do not interfere
with each other. So let's revisit the same example to better
understand this. Imagine two users
updating the same data. User 1 changes the name of the user from Timothee
Chalamet to Xavier Laurent. At the same time, User
2 attempts to change the location of Timothee
Chalamet from Paris to New York. The final outcome, whether it's Xavier Laurent in Paris or
Timothee Chalamet in New York, depends solely on the order in which these transactions
are processed. What's important to note here
is that the situation of Xavier Laurent in
New York can never arise here with a
relational database system. So the concurrency
control protocol is crucial for maintaining data consistency across
concurrent database transactions. In a relational airbase, transactions are atomic, and that helps in
handling failures. This means that they operate under an all
or nothing principle. Either the entire transaction
is completed successfully, or if any part of the
transaction fails, none of it takes effect. This is crucial for
preventing partial updates that could lead to
data inconsistencies. And to manage this,
the database system uses a logging and
recovery protocol. So when a transaction
is initiated, all the changes are
logged to a file on disk, and if a transaction encounters an issue and cannot
be completed, the database system
uses the log changes on disk to revert all of them back to the last
consistent state. This ensures that
the database remains accurate and reliable even
in the event of a failure. Let's revisit the
example involving adding a country column
to the user's table. If a power failure occurs
during this update, the entire transaction
will be rolled back. This means that none
of the changes, including those made to
Timothee Chalamet or Lana Condor or Liu Lifei will be retained
in the database. Relational databases
cache frequently access data in memory, as shown in steps 1 and 2. So this happens when
reading data from disk. Similarly, when writing
data back to disk, the database system uses a transaction log on disk
to synchronize changes between the cached and
disk resident data as shown in steps 3, 4, and 5. So this transaction log is stored in a
separate location on disk and helps maintain
data consistency. So in this way, a
relational database system does efficient
memory management. Let's look at the last benefit of using a relational
database system. SQL allows users to perform complex data
retrieval operations using simple readable queries. For example, retrieving
all the comments made by Lana Condor is straightforward
using this SQL query that operates on the posts
and interactions table. This approach eliminates
the need for custom coding, drastically reducing the time
and potential for errors. Users can focus on
the data that they need and not really on how to programmatically
retrieve it. This is why SQL is a
declarative query language, unlike imperative languages
like Python and C++. In this lesson, we
discussed about the idea of a relation database system and
explained about how a relation database
system addresses all of the limitations of a simple
flat-file database system.

>> In this lesson, we will
explore relational operators and their role in supporting
complex SQL queries. Relational operators
are functions that operate on tables also
known as relations. So they take in one
or more tables as input and yield a
single table as output. Commonly used
relational operators in SQL are the select operator, the where operator, the group by operator, and
the sum operator. Each operator has a
specific function. The select operator allows us to specify and retrieve a subset
of columns from a table. The where operator allows us to filter the rows based
on some conditions. The group by operator helps organize the rows
into relevant groups, and the sum operator
helps aggregate numerical data
within these groups. Let's go over these operators
in detail as we will later support these operators in the database system that we'll be building
in this course. The select clause in SQL
is also formerly known as the projection operator and is denoted by the
Greek symbol Pi. The projection
operator is used to select specific
columns from a table. So this operator
is useful when we only need to retrieve
certain fields from a really wide table. For example, we could select location of all the users
from the user's table and focus our data extraction on just those columns
necessary for our analysis. The where clause in
SQL is also known as the selection operator and is denoted by the
Greek symbol Sigma. The selection operator
allows us to filter rows based on some
specific conditions. For example, to find all the interactions in the interactions table
that are labeled as likes, we could use this query
where the where clause is filtering based on the
reaction type column. The grouping operator
is used to group rows, sharing the same values
into these aggregate rows. So this operator is
often used along with aggregate functions like sum or count for summarizing data. For example, this query
counts the number of reactions that
each post received. So we are grouping the
posts based on post ID, and that allows us
to provide insights into the engagement
received by each post. The next operator
that we will look at is the aggregation operator or the sum operator
that is used for performing quantitative
analysis on the group data. This operator is denoted
by capital Sigma. For example, this query aggregates the number of
post made by each user. It adds together
all the values in a specific column for each group as defined
in the group by clause. By aggregating values in
a column for each group, we can derive useful insights about the overall
data distribution. The last operator
that we will look at is the join operator, which is very important
in relational databases, as it helps combine information from two or more tables based
on a specified condition. So this is the join symbol. Consider this query
that is used for finding the total engagement
received by each post, along with the content
of the post itself. So here, the join operator
is used to link together the pose and interactions
tables based on post ID, and that allows us to access the columns in all
of these tables. Let's next discuss briefly
about relational algebra. Relational algebra provides
a theoretical foundation for manipulating tables using
operators like selection, join, and group by. By applying these
operators in a sequence, we can efficiently filter, aggregate, and connect data. This methodolical approach
underpins SQL operations, ensuring that complex
data relationships are handled with
precision and clarity. The power of SQL comes
from relational algebra, where we combine these
relational operators to derive insights from data. So consider this
illustrative query for finding the post
with the most likes, along with the users
who like that post. This query uses several
relational operators. We filter the interactions to include only those that
are like reactions. We then join the
interaction table with the users table
to link each like reaction to its respective user. The query then groups
the results by post ID, aggregating information
such as the number of likes and the users
who liked each post. We then project only the
necessary fields like post ID, the number of likes, and a concatenated string
of user IDs and user names. Lastly, we sort the post
and limit it to one row to identify the
most popular post and the users who liked it. So the query result might
look something like this. Here, the most popular
post is Post 1002, which was liked by three users, and the names of those users is listed below as a
concatenated string. So in relation to algebra, this query can be
expressed as shown here. The selection
operator Sigma first filters the interactions
for like reactions. The output table is joined with the user's table to associate the likes to specific
users based on user ID. The output is then grouped by post ID using the Gamma symbol. This grouping also counts
the likes for each post, and concatenates the
user IDs and user names, providing insights into the
users who like that post. We then project out the
required columns to be displayed in the
final output table that's represented
by the Pi symbol. And lastly, the sorting operator Tau is used to order the post in descending order
of popularity to identify the
most popular post. This breakdown shows
how each component of the SQL query corresponds to a specific relational
algebraic operator. After this lesson, I hope you have gained a deeper
understanding of how powerful SQL can be in analysing data with
relational operators. We explored how different
SQL query components map to relational algebraic
operators and how they can be combined to construct
complex queries in a relational database.