In this module, we will introduce
the buffer manager that improves performance
by minimizing costly disk IO operations. We will discuss about
how the buffer manager maintains a cache of frequently
accessed pages in DRAM. We will then explore cache
eviction policies which determine which page to evict from memory to disk when
the buffer is full. We will learn about
the buffer pool flodding problem with
sequential scans and present the two Q policy that avoids the buffer
pool flodding problem.
 
 
In this lesson, we will introduce a buffer
manager that improves performance by
maintaining a cache of frequently accessed
disk pages in DRAM. We will then learn about cache
replacement policies which determine which page to evict from the buffer
pool when it is full. Disk IO operations
are time consuming. Axing data in memory typically takes around 50 nanoseconds. However, axing a page on an SST is very slow and takes
around 50 microseconds. So axing data from an
SST is roughly 1,000 times slower than axing
data from memory. When we look at cost, DRAM is super expensive. It costs around $10 per GB. In contrast, SST costs
around $0.10 per GB, so it is important to
minimize diskIO operations. To minimize disk operations, it is crucial to cache frequently accessed
pages in memory. The buffer manager is responsible for
caching these pages. The buffer manager is
crucial for bridging the gap between fast but limited DRAM and slow but vast disk storage. The storage manager handles low level disk storage
operations like reading, writing, and extending
the database file. The buffer manager collaborates
with the storage manager to load data into memory
on demand and to flush, modify data back to disk. In this slide, we will look at the implementation of the
buffer manager in buzz DB. The buffer manager uses the storage manager to load
and flush pages to disk. It maintains a list of pages
in the in memory buffer, along with their page IDs. LRU list is a list of pairs containing a page ID and a unique pointer
to a slotted page. It also maintains a map for quickly looking
up pages in LRU list. This is an unordered map in C
plus plus that maps page ID through an iterator pointing to the corresponding
entry in LRU list. Get page is the method used for retrieving a page using
the buffer manager. It takes a page ID
as input and returns a reference to a unique
pointer to a slotted page. This method is used by
other components of BS DB to get pages into memory. If the requested page
is not in memory, it would typically involve
loading the page from disk, possibly evicting another page in the buffer pool
if it is full. When the in memory
buffer is full, the buffer manager must evict a page from the
buffer pool to disk. This LRU policy dictates which page is the first to be evicted when the
memory buffer is full. We use the least recently
used or LRU eviction policy. This policy evicts the page that was least recently accessed. This diagram illustrates
the LRU policy. In the initial state, the
cache holds four pages. When page two is accessed, it is moved to the most
recently used position. Subsequently, when
a new page F is accessed and there is no
more space in the cache, page six, which is
the least recently used is evicted to make
room for page five. The LRU policy assumes
that pages that are not accessed recently are less likely to be
accessed again soon. As we discussed earlier, each page has a unique page ID. The LRU list stores the currently loaded
pages in LRU order. The page map maps page IDs to their locations in
the AAU list to allow quick access to
any page in memory. When a page is requested
and not found in the cache, the buffer manager calls the storage manager to
load that page from disk. After loading, the
page position in the LRU list is updated
using the touch method, which moves the page to
the front of the list, marking it as most
recently used. The buffer manager leverages the storage manager to abstract away the complexities of
disk storage operations. It only focuses on maximizing cache hits to minimize
disk IO operations. In the touch method,
whenever a page is accessed, its position in the AAU list is updated to reflect
its recent use. This is done using
the splice method, which efficiently moves
the accessed page to the front of the list, marking it as the
most recently used. The EIC method is responsible for removing the least recently
used page from the cache. Evicted page is located at
the end of the AAU list. Before eviction, it is
flushed to the disk using the storage manager
to ensure that no changes made to
that page are lost. It is then removed from both the page map and the AAU list, freeing up space for a
new page in the buffer. Overall, this tagram illustrates the process flow of the buffer manager while
handling page requests. Initially, it checks if the requested page
X is in memory. If the page is present, then the buffer manager
updates the AA list to mark the page as recently
accessed before returning it. If the page is not in memory, then the buffer manager
loads it from disk, updates the AA list, potentially evicting the
least recently used page if the cache is full and then returns the
newly loaded page. By adding a buffer manager, busdB handles all page
related operations through this new class without directly interacting with
the storage manager. Here, we retrieve
a specific page using the get page method and then perform an
insertion operation on that page using the
At tuple method. This design improves
the modularity of BSDB. In this lesson, we introduced
a buffer manager that improves performance by minimizing costly
disco operations. We then discussed about the
LRU cache replacement policy and how it caches recently
accessed pages in memory.
 
 
In this lesson, we will present
a policy interface that allows different
eviction policies to be implemented
in the same way. We will learn about
the importance of separating policy from
mechanism in system design. The policy interface
serves as a template for implementing different cache eviction
policies in BSDB. It is an abstract base
class with a set of virtual functions that must be implemented by any class
inheriting from policy. The touch and evict
functions are the essence of any
cache eviction policy. The touch function
is responsible for keeping track of page aces. The evict function
is responsible for selecting pages
for eviction. Let us look at implementing another cache eviction policy using this policy interface. The FIFO policy simply evicts the oldest loaded page based on its arrival time
into the buffer pool. In this snippet, the FIFO policy is derived from the
abstract policy class. The touch method appends the accessed page to a que only if it is not
already in the queue. Unlike the LRU policy, it does not update
the location of the page within the queue to
indicate its recent axis. The override keyword
indicates that this method is overriding the virtual
touch function in the base policy class. The AC method selects the page
at the front of the queue, which is the oldest
page in terms of when it was last touched. This picture illustrates
the FIFO policy. The cache is shown in its starting condition with a set of pages already loaded. The most recently added
page label indicates the last page that was added to the cache following
the FIFO principle. After axing page two, the cache state remains unchanged as page two is
already in the cache. FIFO does not reorder pages
based on access recency. After axing page five, because the cache is full, the FIFO policy dictates
that the oldest page seven must be evicted to make
room for the new page five. While it is simple,
the FIFO policy is not effective on
real workloads as it evicts recently
accessed pages just because they were added
earlier into the queue. In contrast, the AAU policy prioritizes pages that have
been accessed recently. In this snippet, the AAU policy also derives from
the policy class. It maintains a list to
keep track of the order of page access and a map
for quick page lookups. By keeping recently
accessed pages in memory, the AAU policy is better than the FIO policy at keeping more
important pages in memory. The buffer manager includes a pointer to the policy object, allowing for dynamic selection of eviction policies at runtime. With this design, we can
even update the policy based on the workload without changing the rest
of the buffer manager. In the get page
method in bus DB, the touch method of
the current policy is invoked whenever a page is accessed to update the
state in the policy object. If the buffer size
limit is reached, then the evic method of
the current policy is invoked to determine
which page to remove. In Bz DB, the
distinction between policy and mechanism
is important. In fact, policy
uses mechanism is a fundamental concept
in system design. Policies determine what
action should be taken while mechanisms determine how these actions are executed. This separation allows
us to switch between different policies without overhauling the
underlying mechanisms. In the buffer manager,
the case eviction policy decides which payers to evict
based on some criteria. While the mechanism handles the operational details of
writing the page to disk. Here's another example based on index maintenance to illustrate the difference between
policy and mechanism. Lazy updates represents
a policy where the index is updated at
predetermined intervals, such as every 5 minutes. This method can
enhance performance because updates are batched and processed less frequently, reducing the overhead of each
individual write operation. However, the downside is
that the index may be temporarily out of date between updates
leading to stale data. Eager updates on the other hand, involves updating
indices immediately as the data changes. This policy ensures that
the index always reflects the most recent data supporting accurate and
fast query responses. The trade off here is
higher write latency as every data modification requires an immediate update
to the index, thereby increasing the time
taken to do write operations. Regardless of whether the lazy or eager update
policy is chosen, the mechanism is the same
for updating the index. The mechanism describes the
underlying infrastructure for executing these policies. It manages the technical details of how the index is updated based on whether the index is an ordered map or
another data structure. This separation
between policy and mechanism allows
the system to adapt its index update policy without altering the mechanism that
manages the index structure. To recap, in this lesson, we discussed about the
policy interface and the importance of separating
policy from mechanism. As a systems developer
or systems researcher, it is important to pay
more attention to policies as they are more likely to stand the test of time
compared to mechanisms.
 
 
In this lesson, we will first present the Buffer
Pool flooding problem. Even with the LAU policy, when the database performs
a sequential scan, the scan can potentially
flood the buffer pool with less important pages that might not be
needed afterwards. We will then present
the two Q policy that tackles this Buffer
Pool flooding problem. Sequential scans
occur when a database reads through every page of
a table to answer a query. This typically
happens when there is no index to avoid scanning
through the entire table. In this example, if there is no index on the
sale date column, the database needs to
check every tuple in the sales data table to see if it falls between those dates. Sequential scan is problematic
because it can lead to loading many unimportant pages
into the in memory buffer. Both FIFO and AAU policies struggle with sequential scans. FIFO evicts the oldest page from the cache regardless of
its current utility, removing important
pages to make space for all the pages needed
during the sequential scan. More interestingly,
the AaroPolicy also evicts hot
pages to accommodate cold pages that are
accessed during the sequencial scan just because they are
recently accessed. Consider this page access trace to understand the buffer
pool thudding problem. Let's assume that the buffer Pool capacity
is three pages. The goal of this analysis
is to understand how different caching
policies handle this page access trace and
evaluate their efficacy. To measure the
policy's efficacy, we look at the number
of cache measures where the requested page is not found in the buffer pool necessitating a slow
fetch from disk. On this trace, the FIFO policy evicts hot pages
like pages 1 and 2, which are repeatedly evicted
and then accessed again. Let's next look at
the AAU policy. On this trace, the AAU policy also evicts hot pages
like pages 1 and 2, due to the sequence of scan, leading to ten cache misses. The two Q policy addresses this challenge by using
two separate queues, a PF Q for read one's pages
that are accessed during a sequential scan and a separate LRU queue for
frequently accessed hot pages. Pages initially land
in the PF Q and upon second access get
promoted to the LRU Que. While evicting pages, the two
Q policy first removes read one's pages in the FF Qu thereby not removing the important
pages in the buffer pool. This code outlines how the page promotion works
in the two Q policy. Pages initially
enter the F for Q. Upon second access,
they get promoted to the LRUQ recognizing their
increased importance and frequency of access. When a page is accessed, if it is already in the LRUQ, then its position is updated to indicate that it was
recently accessed. This approach ensures that frequently accessed
pages are in the LRUQ. Here in the touch method, when a page is accessed, we first check the FFQ. If the page is in the FFO Q, it is removed from the FFQ
and pushed to the front of the LAUQ to reflect its
higher reuse probability. If a page already resides in the LAUQ and is accessed again, then it is moved to the front of the Q to mark it as the
most recently used. This update ensures that the most recently used pages in the LAUQ are the
last to be evicted. If the page is not
in both queues, it's time to check if
the cache is full. Each page ID can only exist in the P for
Q or D Lara ques. The same page ID cannot
be in both queues. So we calculate the
sum of the size of the two Ques to check
if the cache is full. If the cache reaches
its capacity, then the EVC method is
triggered to make space, and the newly added page
is added to the FFQ. The two Q policy prioritizes evicting pages from the FF Q. This is how it avoids the
buffer pool flooding problem. By targeting read one's
pages in the P for Q first, it retains pages with higher reuse probability
in the cache. If the P for Q is empty, that means that all the
pages are in the LRUQ. In this case, it evicts the least recently used
page from the LRUQ. So there are two cases. If the FFQ is not empty, then the oldest page, the one at the front of
the FFQ is evicted first. This action targets read one's pages that are unlikely
to be accessed again soon. If the FFO Q is empty, then the least
recently used page at the back of the
LRUQ is evicted. This step is taken only
when the PIF Q is empty, as all the pages in
the LRU are hot. In this way, the two Q
policy cleverly combines the FIFO and LRU Q to reduce cache pollution
from sequential scans. Let's revisit the
page access trace with the two Q policy. Initially, pages 1 and 2 are accessed and
placed in the F for Q. When page one is accessed again, it moves to the LRUQ signaling
its increased importance. At any point in time, the
total number of pages in both queues must be less than or equal to the
buffer pool size. A page can only be
in either the P for Q or the LRUQ not in both
queues at the same time. Overall, the two
Q policy ensures that hot pages like pages 1 and 2 stay protected in the LRUQ and results in only
six cache misses. Besides FIFO LRU and two Q, there are other cache
eviction policies. East frequently used or LFU keeps frequently
used pages in memory. LFU's major limitation
lies in its lack of responsiveness to recent
changes in access patterns. As it prioritizes
frequency over recency, LFU may keep pages that
were frequently accessed in the past but are no longer relevant leading to sub
optimal cache utilization. Adaptive replacement cache or ARC is another
interesting policy. ARC dynamically balances between LRU and LFU based on
the observed workload, adapting to changing
page access patterns. It uses a self tuning mechanism that adapts the sizes
of its two lists, one list for recency, another list for frequency. The main challenge with ARC is its implementation
complexity. So far, our discussion of cache eviction policies
has been a bit abstract. Let's consider a music
streaming application to better appreciate
these policies. In this application, the
cache is a limited list of recommended songs
that is dynamically updated based on the
user's listening habits. In this case, the LRU policy would end up recommending
songs that you have played recently
and removing those that you haven't
listened to recently. In contrast, the two Q policy strikes a balance between
favorites and new discoveries. It is best for users whose listening preferences
evolve over time. The two Q policy initially
places new songs in a fee for and moves them to
LRUQ if you play it again, thereby optimizing
the cache to include a mix of both familiar tunes
and potential new hits. To recap, in this lesson, we discussed about the buffer
pool flooding problem by sequential scans and how the two Q policy
tackles this problem. By categorizing pages
into read ones and hot pages and managing
them in separate queues, the two Q policy
maximizes cache utility.
 
 
In this module, we presented
the Buffer manager class. The Buffer manager class
allows Bz DB to handle all page related
operations through this new class without directly interacting with
the storage manager. We then discussed about how different cash eviction policies determine the performance
of the buffer manager. We learned about the distinction between policies and mechanisms. We then focused on how the two Q policy minimizes
cash pollution by categorizing pages
into read ones and hot pages and managing
them in separate queues.