>> In this module, we will learn about designing a
thread-safe hash table, a core component in
a database system. First, we will discuss what it means for a hash table
to be thread safe and why avoiding risk conditions is important in a multi
threaded database environment. Then we will look at
fine grained locking, a technique that allows
multiple threads to work with different parts of
the hash table at the same time, thereby
improving concurrency. Next, we will explore
shared mutexes, which allow threads
to look up keys in a hash table without too
much locking overhead. Finally, we will compare different concurrency control protocols using a simulator.
 
>> In this module,
we will focus on accelerating hash
index operations by using multiple threads. As databases grow in size, building an index using a single thread
becomes a bottleneck. We will learn about how
to use multiple cores effectively to speed up this
index construction process. We will also discuss
about how to make the hash index thread safe so that multiple
threads can safely access the index
at the same time. The traditional
method of building an index one page
at a time is time consuming and becomes a
performance bottleneck on modern multicore CPUs. On a multicore CPU, we can parallelise this
index construction task to significantly cut down the overall time to
build the index. In the next version of Bass DB, we introduce parallel
index construction. Let's look at the code. The parallel process
pages function divides the total number of pages by the number of
available threads, and then assigns each thread
a range of pages to process. Each thread then excutes the
process page range function over the start page and end page parameters
assigned for that thread. For example, if you have seven pages in the
table and two threads, we assign the first
three pages to Thread 1 and the remaining
four pages through Thread 2. While parallel
index construction accelerates the
building process, there is the risk of multiple
threads attempting to update the same part of
the index simultaneously. Without proper synchronization,
this can lead to data loss as two threads may overwrite each
other's updates. We refer to this problem
as lack of thread safety. Thread safety is a property of a data structure that guarantees safe execution by
multiple threads at the same time without causing any data loss
or data corruption. The hash index is
currently not thread safe. Consider this example. We have a hash table
with linear probing and a hash function that
is simply Key mod 10. Let's say Thread 1 and
Thread 2 simultaneously try to insert the Keys
15 and 25 respectively. When we apply the hash function
for both Keys 15 and 25, the hash value is 5, Let's say Thread 1 probes
and finds Slot 5 is empty. Before Thread 1 inserts
Key 15 in that slot, there is a context
switch to Thread 2. Thread 2 also probes and
finds Slot 5 is empty, and decides to store Key
25 in the same slot. If you look at the
race condition, from a higher level
operation standpoint, it looks like this. Thread 1 hashes the
key and probe Slot 5. Before it stores the
key in that slot, Thread 2 gets switched in
by the operating system. Thread 2 hashes its key
and also probe Slot 5. Then Thread 1 gets
switched back in. It stores its Key 15 in Slot 5. And lastly, Thread 2
gets switched in and it stores Key 25
in the same slot. So that is a race
condition inside the hash table during
parallel index construction. To address this race condition, we need to use a mutex. A mutex helps serialize access
to the shared hash table. So only one thread can modify the index
at any given time, preventing the race conditions that could otherwise occur. In this code, we use a
SDD lock good inside the hash index to manage the acquisition and release
of the index mutex. This ensures that
the index mutex is automatically released when
the guard goes out of scope. Let's revisit the same example after we introduce the mutex. Now, when Thread 1 begins
updating the index, it acquires the mutex, blocking other threads from
entering the hash table. In Step 3, we see that
when Thread 2 attempts to start its update operation
on another CPU core, while Thread 1 is active, it must wait for Thread
1 to unlock the mutex. In Step 5, we see that Thread 1
releases the index mutex. In Step 6, Thread 2 then acquires the lock and proceeds
with its update. Since Slot 5 is
already occupied, it inserts Key 25 in Slot 6. In this way, controlled
sequential access to the hash index ensures that all modifications are
performed safely, maintaining the integrity and consistency of the hash index. Note that there is no need for Thread 1 to always
precede Thread 2. In this execution, we see what happens if Thread 2
precedes Thread 1. Here, Thread 1 is
waiting for Thread 2 to finish its update and
release the index mutex. Thread 2 places the
Key 25 in Slot 5, so Thread 1 ends up
placing Key 15 in Slot 6. Even with this thread interleaving by the
operating system scheduler, due to proper synchronization
using the mutex, both keys are inserted
properly in the hash table, and there is no data loss. The final state of the
hash table depends on which thread gets to execute
its insertion first. If Thread 1 runs first
before Thread 2, then Key 15 is placed in Slot 5, and Key 25 is placed in Slot 6. If Thread 2 runs
before Thread 1, then Key 25 is placed in Slot 5 and Key 15 is
placed in Slot 6. In both thread interleavings, the keys are
successfully inserted, and there is no
overwriting involved. To recap, in this lesson, we learned about the
importance of thread safety in managing concurrent operations
from multiple threads. We also discussed
about how to speed up index construction by paralyzing the task across
multiple threads.
 
>> In this lesson,
we will examine the concept of fine-grain
locking within a hash table. This approach allows
multiple threads to operate on different parts of the
hash table simultaneously, drastically reducing lock contention and
enhancing concurrency. When multiple threads
attempt to insert or update key value
pairs in a hash table, using a single mutex for the entire table significantly
limits parallelism. For example, let's
say Threads 1 and 2, want to insert keys 12
and 27 into the table. Thread 1 needs to look at
Slot 2 as 12 mod 10 is two. And then Thread 2 needs
to look at Slot 7 as 27 mod 10 is seven. Even though these threads are
working on different slots, they need to wait
for the same mutex, so the performance drops down to that of single-threaded
exclusion. To address this issue in
the next version of bus DB, we introduce
fine-grained locking. This method involves associating a separate mutex with each
slot in the hash table. Such a setup allows each thread to lock only the slot
it needs to access, leaving the rest of the
hash table free for other threads to operate
on simultaneously. Here, for example, Thread 1 tries to lock Slot 2 and Thread 2 tries to
simultaneously lock Slot 7. They both independently do the insert operations, thereby
increasing concurrency. Let's look at the insert
or update function. Here, we associate each slot in the hash table
with its own mutex, so we have a vector of
pointers to mutexes. We limit the scope of lock
acquisition to a single slot, which is critical for
increasing concurrency. Why do we use a vector
of unique pointers to mutexes instead of directly
using a vector of mutexes? SDD vector requires the element to be movable since the elements must be moved to a new memory location when the vector needs
to be expanded. However, mutex objects are
non-movable and non-copiable. This is by design to prevent accidental
moving of the mutex. Mutex objects are low level synchronization
primitives that are tightly integrated with the underlying operating system. To work around this constraint, we use a vector of unique
pointers to mutexes. When the vector needs
to grow or shrink, only the pointers
are moved or copied, not the mutexes themselves, ensuring thread safety and
mutex state consistency. While retrieving values
in the getValue method, we traverse through the
index one slot at a time. Before axing the slot, we lock the specific
slots mutex. This ensures that reads are not interrupted by
concurrent writes, ensuring reliable results
even under high concurrency. Fine-grain locking significantly
boost parallelism by enabling multiple
threads to update different parts of the
hash table simultaneously. It reduces the likelihood of
threads waiting for locks, thereby decreasing
contention and improving overall
index throughput. However, while it
enhances performance, it also introduces
additional overhead due to the management
of multiple locks. The cost of acquiring and releasing locks increases
with the number of locks. Each lock consumes resources, so more locks mean
more memory usage. It is important to find the right balance in
lock granularity. Too fine might lead to
excessive overhead, while too coarse can
inhibit parallelism. In general, for any
data structure, we need to look
at the axis pans. If the contention is high for certain parts of
the data structure, then those parts might benefit
from finer granularity. For other parts of the data structure with low contention, coarser locks might
be sufficient. In this lesson, we
learned about how fine-grained locking improves concurrency of a hash index.
 
>> In this lesson, we will learn about how
mutex can limit concurrency, particularly in
read-heavy workloads. We will discuss about how
shared mutex in C++ offers a more refined
approach to managing read and write operations in the hash table, thereby
increasing concurrency. With fine-grain locking,
using a mutex for each slot provides
mutual exclusion by allowing only one thread
at a time to access the slot irrespective of whether it is a read
or write operation. While the mutex is
effective in ensuring data integrity during
write operations, it severely limits concurrency
for read operations. In scenarios where
multiple threads need to read a slot while
finding a key, they have to wait for
exclusive access to the slot. This approach severely
limits concurrency, even though multiple
threads could safely read the slot simultaneously
without risk. For example, consider
three threads trying to do different operations
on a slot at the same time. Let's say Thread 1 is doing an insert or write operation and Threads 2 and 3 are doing
find or read operations. With the mutex, here is a possible interleaving. First, Thread 3 does its read
operation at time step 1. Then Thread 1 does its write
operation at time step 2. Then Thread 2 does its read
operation at time step 3. In this way, they have to access the shared slot one at a
time due to the mutex. To address the concurrency
limitation of mutex, we transition to
std::shared_mutex in the next version of bus DB. This shared mutex differentiates between read and
write operations, enabling multiple threads to hold a read lock simultaneously while still ensuring
exclusive access for threads performing
write operations. Let's revisit the
previous example. With a shared mutex, Threads 2 and 3 get
shared access to the slot at the same time and can read
the slot at time step 1. Then Thread 1 gets
exclusive access to the slot to complete its write
operation at time step 2. By allowing several read
operations to occur in parallel without waiting for
other reads to complete, shared_mutex
increases concurrency in read-heavy workloads. Let's look at the code. In the insert or
update function, each hash table slot is now protected by its
own shared_mutex. Write operations require an exclusive lock via
std::unique lock. For read operations in
the get value function, shared lock is
utilized to ensure that multiple threads can access the same slot concurrently as long as no thread
is writing to it. This drastically improves
read throughput as even 16 threads can concurrently read the index
in a thread-safe way. During modifications
to the data structure, std::unique_lock provides
a necessary barrier that ensures a threat's
exclusive access to data. This lock is essential for write operations
that could lead to data erases if not protected
from other threads. For example, here,
Thread 2 currently holds the unique_cock and is
performing a write operation. Threads 1 and 3 are
blocked and cannot access the shared hash table slot until Thread 2 releases
the shared_mutex. While reading the
data structure, std::shared_lock allows
multiple threads to read from the same slot without blocking
each other unless there is a thread riding to
that slot at the same time. For example, both
Threads 1 and 3 have the shared_lock
and are performing read operations
at the same time. Thread 2 is blocked and cannot
gain exclusive access to the shared hash table slot until Threads 2 and 3
release the shared_lock. This accelerates read operations in the hash table by allowing simultaneous access
from multiple readers without compromising
thread safety. Let's look at the big picture of fine-grain locking
with shared_mutex. Each slot is protected
using its own shared_mutex. When Thread 2 writes
data to slot 2, it acquires an exclusive
lock on that slot only. Simultaneously, Threads 1
and 3 can read from slot 7 using a shared_lock, thereby
enhancing concurrency. Thus, fine-grain locking with shared_mutex not only protects
data integrity but also significantly boosts
operational throughput by allowing concurrent read
and write operations across different slots
of the hash table. In this lesson, we explore
how to transition from mutex to shared_mutex to further improve concurrency
in the hash table.
 
>> In this lesson, we will present a simulation
framework for comparing the performance of different concurrency
control protocols in the hash table. This simulation framework
will help us better understand the behavior of the different locking protocols. In our framework, we do
not use real threads and mutexes to demonstrate concurrency control
for two reasons. First, they execute
in real time, which is typically too fast
for qualitative analysis. Second, real threats are managed
by the operating system, so the order in which they
run is non-deterministic and difficult to replicate consistently for
educational purposes. By simulating
threads and mutexes, we create a manageable step by step educational simulator
that allows us to understand the sequential progression of events in a concurrent
environment. Unlike real threats, these simulated threads
are deterministic. However, it is important to
note that the simulator only roughly approximates
the behavior of real threats and mutexes. We build a simulator in Python. We start by simulating a mutex. The simulated mutex allows only one thread to access a
shared resource at any time. Here, the try_acquire method checks if the mutex
is currently locked. If not, it locks the resource and allows the
requesting thread to proceed. Otherwise, it forces the thread to wait, simulating contention. We next simulate a shared mutex. Unlike the simple mutex, the simulated shared
mutex supports multiple readers
simultaneously or a single writer exclusively. It has four methods. The try_acquire_write method
ensures that a write lock is only granted if no other reads or writes are currently active. The try_acquire_read
method grants read access as long as no other thread is
holding a write lock. The other two
methods are used for releasing read and write locks. We then simulate a
concurrent hash table that can operate under three
different locking protocols. First, a global mutex for
the entire hash table. Second, an individual
mutex for each slot. Third, a shared mutex for
each slot that allows multiple reads or a single write in a single logical time step. With a global mutex, only one thread can do any operations on the
hash table at a time. Here, Thread 2 is trying
to insert a key into the table after acquiring
the global mutex. Next, with a mutex
per slot protocol, threads can independently
work on different slots. However, for a given slot, only one thread can do
any operation at a time. Here, threads 1 and
3 are working on slots 2 and 7 at the same time. Lastly, with a shared
mutex per slot protocol, threads can independently
work on different slots, similar to the previous
concurrency control protocol. However, unlike the
previous protocol, for a given slot, there can be multiple readers
at a given time. Here, threads 1 and 3 are
simultaneously reading Slot 7. We next simulate threads. Each thread in our
simulation performs a series of find and insert operations
on the hash table. In the simulation,
we carefully manage each thread state and manage transitions between different
states like locking, reading a slot, writing
to a slot, and unlocking. There is a unlock and relock state where
the thread unlocks the current slot and then tries to lock the next lsot
in the next time step. With the simulator, each thread can take only one step
in a logical time step. The simulation stops when all threads have finished all their hash table operations. We ensure that a thread
can acquire a lock, only if it was released in
the previous time step. Here is an illustrative trace. At time step 10 in
the simulation, Thread 0 is attempting to lock Slot 2 for an
insert operation. Meanwhile, Thread 1 has
read Key 25 at Slot 5, and Thread 2 has released
the lock on Slot 3. Our higher level hash table operation trace looks like this. Thread 0 inserts Key 25 and
then finds keys 25 and 15. Thread 1 finds Key 35, followed by inserting Key
35 and then finding Key 25. Thread 2 tries to
find keys 45 and 25. We compare the total logical
time steps required for each locking protocol to complete the same
set of operations. Lower the number of time
steps, better the protocol. On this operation trace, the global mutex
protocol takes 30 steps. The mutex per slot
protocol takes 21 steps, and the shared mutex per slot protocol only
takes 15 steps. The global mutex protocol
takes the highest number of logical time steps because it serializes all access
to the hash table, forcing threads to execute
strictly one at a time. For example, at time step 15, Thread 2 is waiting
for the table lock while Thread 1 is
axing the table. The mutex per slot
protocol takes significantly fewer
time steps compared to the global lock because it
allows concurrent operations on different slots of the hash table, thereby
reducing contention. For example, in time step 7, Thread 0 is working on Slot 6 and Thread 1
is working on Slot 5. Finally, the shared
lock per slot protocol minimizes the number of
logical time steps the most. This is because it allows
multiple reads simultaneously on a given slot unless a write
operation is taking place, and that is helpful as the workload has several
read operations. For example, in time step 7, threads 0 and 2
are simultaneously given read access to Slot 6. So that wraps up this lesson. Using the simulator, you can compare the performance
of these protocols on other operation traces and
improve your intuition about concurrency
control protocols and multi-threaded environments. We learned about how the
choice of locking protocol significantly impacts the time taken to complete the
hash table operations. Fine grained concurrency
control with a shared mutex delivers
the highest performance.
 
>> In this module, we explore the key
ideas behind building a thread-safe hash
table in bus DB. We talked about the
importance of thread safety and how to avoid race conditions in a multi-threaded environment. We covered fine-grained
locking and how it improves the
concurrency of the hash index. We then discussed about
shared mutexes and how they allow multiple read operations to happen simultaneously
in the hash table. Lastly, we used a simulator to qualitatively
compare the time taken to finish a set of hash table operations with different concurrency
control protocols.