In this lesson, we
will learn about how the database system manages database on durable
storage like disk. We will learn about storage
technologies and support for file input output
operations in Spls plus. The next version of Bus DB
will use these Spls plus features to persist data
on durable storage. The time taken to run
queries and transactions in a database system depends on the underlying
storage technologies. Database systems rely on two primary types of
storage technologies, volatile storage and
persistent storage. Each type of storage
plays a specific role in the life cycle of data
within a database system. DRAM or dynamic
random access memory is used for fast short
term data access. It is primarily used for caching frequently accessed
data and storing intermediate tables created
during query processing. However, data stored in memory is lost if the power
is interrupted. So it is not suitable for
long term data storage. Despite this, DAM
significantly enhances database performance
by facilitating faster access to
frequently used data. Persistent storage devices like solid state drive or SSD
and hard disk drive or HDD, the retained data even through power outages and
system restarts. These devices are the primary storage
medium for databases and contain everything from tuples and transaction
logs to database pups. These technologies are important for ensuring the
durability property in as. Let's look at the
life cycle of data. Consider a bank transaction. In Stage one, the
transaction updates are initially
returned to memory, allowing for rapid
data processing. DRAM stores hot data like recently accessed
bank accounts, enabling quick queries and
updates over these accounts. In Stage two, upon successfully committing
the transaction, the changes are
transferred from DRAM to Tisc to ensure that
the data is safe. Once a transaction is committed, it's permanently
recorded on disc, safe cording against data loss, even in the case of
a power failure. DRM supports faster data access, but is not durable. Disc only supports slow data
access, but is durable. This two stage data life cycle leverages the speed of DRM and the durability of
disc to ensure that transactions are not only
fast, but also secure. Given this context about
storage technologies, let's move on to file
input IPut operations for interacting with persistent storage devices in CPS plus.
 
FiO operations in CplS plus are important for writing and reading data from the
database file on disk. These files include
the actual database, as well as other files
like the transaction log, the configuration
file, et cetera. File AO on disk enables
the database system to manage large databases that
do not even fit in DRM. In Bus DB, we import data from a file called
output dot text. As shown in this code snippet, we first set up a stream
to read from the file. In C plus plus, STD IF stream is used to handle
input file streams. We first open the file
called a output dot text. After opening this file stream, we proceed to read pairs of integers from the file
using a wild loop. We continue to read
from the file as long as there are integers
to read from the file. Each pair of integers is read into the variables field
one and field two. These integers correspond to the key and value
columns in a couple. Together, they correspond
to a row in the table. Once we read a pair of integers, we construct a couple and
insert it into our table. Lastly, we perform an
aggregation query on this table. Before proceeding
with file operations, we first verify the presence of the file in the file system. If the file does not exist, we can alert the user using the STE CR stream and terminate the program
by returning one. This type of error handling
is super important for improving user experience and avoiding data corruption. To assess the efficiency
of database operations, we use the chrono
library in CPlS plus to measure the time
taken to execute queries. This is done by
recording the time at the start and the end of the database operations
with the difference providing the overall time
taken to do those operations. Understanding the
execution time of database operations
is useful for optimizing database
performance as it helps pinpoint slow operations and identifies potential
areas for improvement. Tim dressers also
serve as a benchmark, allowing us for a
comparative analysis of performance across different
versions of PS DP. To recap, in this lesson, we covered the
different types of storage technologies and their importance in
database systems. We also discussed about file IO operations in CPlS
plus and explored how these operations are used in BS DB to process
data stored on disk.
 
In this lesson,
we will introduce the field class to support
data types beyond in teachers. Support for diverse
data types is very important for modern
database applications. We will also learn about several important concepts in CPlS plus, like constructors and
destructor functions and the new and
delete operators. Currently, the Tuple class in DB is designed to only handle
integer key value pairs. However, modern database
applications need other data types like floating
point numbers and strings. To enhance Bz DB's ability to handle different data types, we introduce the field class. The field class has a member
variable called type. Field type is an om that defines two constants
int and float, representing the two
possible data types that a field object can hold. Noms provide a way to define
a set of named constants, making the code more
readable and maintainable. The field class uses a
union to allocate memory for either an integer or a float based on the
type of the field. Unions allow different
data types to share the same memory location for
efficient use of memory. When a field object is created, the allocated memory
is sufficient to accommodate the largest
member of the union. In this case, since both integer and
floating point elements require four bytes
on a the bit server, the union would only
use up four bytes. If the type is set to int, the integer value is
stored in this memory. If the type is set to float, the float value is
stored in this memory. The field class has two
constructor functions, one that takes an integer and another one that takes
a floating point number. The constructor with an
integer parameter initializes the field object with the integer value and
sets its type to int. Similarly, the constructor with the float parameter initializes the field object with a float value and sets
it type to float. This technique is called
constructor overloading, where multiple constructors
are defined with different parameter
types to provide flexibility when creating
objects of the field class. The print method prints the value stored in the field
object based on its type.
 
 
Let's next discuss about constructors and destructors
in Cy plus plus. Constructors in C
plus plus are used to initialize objects
when they are created. In the field class, constructors are specifically
designed to initialize the fields with either
integer or flowed Tara types. We next generalize the
tuple class instead of being limited to storing
integer key value pairs, each tuple now holds a
vector of field objects. So each field corresponds
to a column in that tuple. Now that tuple can
contain five fields, and each field can be
integer or a float value. This generalization significantly expands
the capabilities of Bz DB to store and manage a more diverse
set of data types. We next update the
insert function in bus DB to accommodate the
newly generalized tuple class. This function now constructs tuples that can hold
various data types, including a new field for
floating point numbers. In this way, we can have a richer representation of
data within the database. Many database applications
handle textual data. To support such applications, let's further extend the field
class to handle strings. In particular, we extend the field type um to
also include string. And extend the data member
to be a union that can hold an integer or a float or a pointer to the
characters of the string. This generalization
allows BSD B to handle not only numerical
but also textual data. By supporting integers,
floats and now strings, the field class is now a polymorphic container
for diverse eratypes. Polymorphic means
having multiple forms. Here, a field object can take an integer form or a floating point number
form or a string form. With the addition of
strings to the field class, we need to add support for
dynamic memory allocation. This is because strings can
be of different lengths. For instance, here, the string database
has eight letters, and the string polymorphism
has 12 letters. Unlike integers and float
that have a fixed length, we need flexible
memory allocation to accommodate this variability
in the size of strings. The constructor for
the string type in the field class dynamically allocates memory to
store the string data. The constructor function takes a string parameter
as it initializes the type member of the
field object to string and dynamically allocates memory on the heap to store the
characters of the string. The length of the
allocated memory is the size of the given
string, plus one. The plus one accounts
for the null terminator required to identify
the end of the string. Then we copy the characters
of the string into this dynamically allocated
memory data dots. Lastly, we add a null
terminator at the end of this character array to
mark the end of the string. In C plus plus, dynamic
memory allocation on the heap is accomplished
using the new operator. Allocating on the heap is
important to ensure that the string persists beyond the scope of the
constructor function. A heap allocated variable lasts for the entire duration of the program until it is explicitly destroyed
in the program. This allows us to persist the string beyond the scope
of the constructor function, and the string lasts for the entire duration
of the program. Destructors in C plus plus are special class functions that are invoked when an object goes out of scope or is deleted. This tippet is the destructor
for the field class. It is responsible for cleaning up the
memory allocated for a field object when
it goes out of scope or is explicitly deleted. I statement checks if the
type of the field object is string and if the datas
pointer is not a null pointer, indicating that memory was actually allocated
for the string. If both conditions are met, this destructor function deletes the dynamically
allocated memory on the heap to prevent
memory leaks. Complementing the new operator, the delete operator is used to free the memory
allocated on the heap. For every new operator, there should be a
matching delete operator to prevent memory leaks. This is super important
because memory leaks can result in gradual accumulation of unused memory over time, leading to increased memory
usage and potentially causing the database system to crash or become very slow due to
insufficient memory. To wrap up in this lesson, we discussed about
how we can use a field class to support diverse
data types like strings. We learned about how
constructors and destructors are special class functions
that are automatically called when an object of that class is created
or destroyed. We also discussed about the new and delete operators for dynamic memory management in C plus plus and why it is crucial to prevent
memory leaks.
 
 
 
In this lesson, we first explore the challenges posed by
traditional raw pointers, including memory leaks
and dangling pointers. We will then see
how smart pointers help address these issues, thereby enhancing code safety
and code maintainability. In the current field class, we use a union that includes a raw character pointer
to manage string data. This approach is
risky as there is a possibility of a memory leak if you forget to release the
memory in the destructor. There are four
important problems associated with raw pointers, memory leaks, dangling pointers, double free errors, and
ownership ambiguity. We will next go over
each of these problems. Memory leaks occur when
dynamically allocated memory is not properly deallocated. In this example, the
allocated memory for leaky pointer is never freed as it is not
explicitly deleted. This results in leaking memory, which over time
can significantly degrade the performance and stability of the
database program. Dangling pointers arise
when a pointer continues to reference a memory location long after it has been freed. In this example, dangling
pointer is created and deleted. Accessing it after
its de location can lead to data corruption, and even program crash. Double freeing memory or attempting to deallocate
the same memory twice can lead to runtime
errors or undefined behavior. This example illustrates how the double trouble pointer is
incorrectly deleted twice. This error occurs when there is a mismanagement in the
life cycle of a pointer, leading to multiple delete calls on the same memory allocation. Raw pointers do not
inherently express ownership, so it is not clear who is responsible for deallocating the memory that they point to. This ambiguity can complicate memory management when multiple functions in BzDB interact
with the same pointers. In this example, it is
unclear if MPointer and new pointer should be deleted by function one or function two. Should the calling
function delete the return pointer, et cetera. Given this context about
the perils of raw pointers, let's next discuss
about smart pointers and how they address
these problems. Smart pointers like
STD Unique Pointer, are designed to provide
automatic memory management. They address the core issues associated with raw pointers by providing a robust
framework for managing the life cycle of dynamically
allocated objects. They effectively prevent
memory leaks and address the ownership ambiguity
problem of raw pointers, thereby enhancing code safety, readability and maintainability. A steady unique pointer
automatically manages the memory it points to deallocating it when the pointer
goes out of scope. For instance, when
the function exits. This automatic
management ensures that memory leaks are prevented as there is no need
for manual deletion. While using Unique pointer, when we reset the smart pointer or when it goes out of scope, it safely releases its
ownership and avoids becoming a dangling pointer by setting
itself to null pointer. In this example, safe pointer becomes null pointer
when it is reset. This behavior ensures
that it does not become a dangling pointer and continue to reference
deallocated memory. Unique Pointer maintains unique
ownership of its memory, meaning that the memory
is freed exactly once, either when the pointer is reset or when it goes out of scope. This unique ownership
model inherently prevents double freerers as the memory management
is controlled. In this example, there is no
need to delete safe pointer. Spot pointers clearly define
ownership responsibilities. SDD Unique Pointer,
for instance, uses explicit ownership transfer
mechanisms like SDD MU, eliminating any ambiguity
about who owns the memory. This explicit transfer of ownership simplifies memory
management and ensures that each piece of
allocated memory has a clear and single owner
responsible for its life cycle. In conclusion, we learned
how smart pointers offer a significant improvement over raw pointers by automating
memory management, enhancing code safety, and clarifying ownership
responsibilities. So in this course, in all
the programming assignments, we will encourage you to use Smart Pointers for
memory management.
 
 
In this lesson, we
will focus on adopting smart pointers in the
field and tupple classes. We will then explore copy
semantics in CiplusPlus as they come into play when a field object is
copied into the table. Lastly, we will discuss
about heap and stack memory allocation to better understand where data resides. In our field class,
let us move away from manual memory
management and instead use a smart pointer for managing
a variable size string. This change is
aimed at improving safety by automating
memory cleanup, thereby reducing the risk of memory leaks and
simplifying the code base. Integrating Unique pointer into the field class eliminates the need for manual
delete calls. This automatic memory
management is due to the destructor of
SDD Unique Pointer, which is designed to handle
memory cleanup on its own. So the default
destructor provided by the C plus plus
compiler is sufficient. This approach reduces
boilerplate code and improves code readability. It also minimizes the risk of memory leaks that can occur with manual memory management. In the next version of Bz DB, we update the tuple
class to contain a vector of unique
pointers to field objects. Unique pointer is
designed to have sole ownership of the
object it points to, so it cannot be copied to
ensure unique ownership. If we need to support
copying of tuple objects, we will first need to support
copying field objects. Copy semantics define the
behavior of a C plus plus class when its objects are
copied, assigned or passed. These operations
are automatically invoked when an object
is passed by value, returned from a function or explicitly copied
via an assignment. With dynamic memory management, incorrect handling of copy
semantics can lead to issues like memory leaks
and dangling pointers. The two key components
of copy semantics are the copy constructor and the copy
assignment operator. The copy constructor initializes a new object as an exact
copy of an existing object. The copy assignment
operator assigns the contents of one
object to another object. Specifically, it is
invoked when an object is assigned the value
of another object, not when a new
object is created. The field class copy constructor
is shown in this slide. The copy constructor for the field class
ensures that when a new field object is created as a copy of an existing one, it receives a new independent
copy of the string. This is known as deep copying. Deep copying ensures that each field object owns its
own copy of the string. The copy assignment operator
is a class method used to assign the contents of one field object to
another field object. This operator is
crucial for handling the transfer of data
between objects. Similar to the copy constructor, this operator also performs a deep copy of the
dynamically managed string. Although Unique pointer
cannot be copied, it supports smooth semantics, which allows the ownership of the managed object to be transferred from one
pointer to another. Using SDD Mu, we can
efficiently transfer resources within our tuple class without the overhead of copying.
 
 
We will next
differentiate between heap and stack memory allocation to better understand
where our data resides. The heap is used for
dynamic memory allocation. Heap allocated variables
have a lifespan that extends beyond the scope
in which they were created, making them suitable for more
flexible data management. They persist until they are
explicitly deallocated. The heap is ideal for objects and data structures
whose size cannot be determined at
compile time or when data needs to persist across different
parts of a program. When a function is called, its variables are
allocated on the stack, and they are automatically deallocated when the
function returns. Stack allocated
variables are only alive during the block scope
in which they are defined. Exiting the block means
that these variables are automatically deallocated
and no longer accessible. Stack is best suited for temporary variables or data whose memory size is
known at compel time, providing efficient
memory management for short lived data. This example
demonstrates the use of a smotPointer for safely managing a vector
allocated on the heap. The vector is managed
and access safely with the cleanup happening
automatically when the unique pointer
goes out of scope, which occurs when the main
function finishes excusion. The create vector on
heap function highlights the ease of managing dynamic
memory with unique pointer. This approach ensures that the
memory is properly managed across functions like create vector on heap and
the main function. In contrast, in this example, create vector on stack function allocates a vector on the stack. When the vector is accessed
in the main function, that is undefined
behavior in C plus plus. The program may crash or worse silently produce
incorrect results. This example highlights
the dangers of inappropriate usage of
stack allocated variables. The key differences between heap and stack allocated
variables are threefold. First, stack variables are automatically managed by the
C plus plus runtime system, while heap variables require management by the programmer. Second, the stack has a much smaller size limit
compared to the heap, making it less suitable for large or variable
sized data structures. The heap can accommodate
much larger allocations as it is limited primarily by
the systems available DRM. Third, stack allocation is generally faster than
heap allocation, as the stack is a contiguous
block of memory and there is no overhead associated with managing heap memory
like fragmentation. In this lesson, we learned
about the benefits of adopting smart pointers in the field and tuple classes. We then discussed about
the copy constructor and copy assignment
operator in Cyprus plus. Lastly, we went over
the differences between heap and stack
memory allocation.
 
 
This lesson explores how a database system
organizes tuples as pages. We will also discuss about
techniques for converting in memory pages into a format suitable for disk storage
and the reverse process. Currently, BSDB manages
all of its data in memory. However, this approach
means that all data is lost when the program terminates
because DRM is volatile. Persistence in database refers to the capability to store data in a way that it survives across multiple sessions
of the database program. Even after we terminate
the bus DV program, the data must be
safely stored on disk. Without persistence, a
database cannot truly serve its purpose of reliably storing and
managing data over time. To ensure data persistence, we introduce the page class in the next version of Bus DB. Pages serve as the basic unit
of data storage on disk. Each disk page is typically
4 kilobytes in size. Bus DV groups duples together into these
fixed size pages, mirroring how data is
physically stored on disk. The page class dynamically
manages tuple insertions, ensuring that the total size of tuples stored in a page does
not exceed its capacity, which is typically
set to 4 kilobytes. Before adding a tuple, we calculate the combined
size of existing tuples and the new tuple
to determine if it fits within the
PDs slice limit.
 
 
We will next look at how to write in memory pages to disk. Serialization is the
process by which we convert in memory data into a format suitable
for storage on disk. Conversely, desalization
involves reconstructing the in memory data from
the data stored on disk. Serialization and
deserilization process are essential for writing to and reading from
persistent storage. In the page class, serialization
involves converting the tuples into a format that can be directly
returned to a page on disk. This process starts by first writing out
the total number of tuples to the file followed by serializing each tuples data. Each tuples data is
serialized field by field. We first record the number of fields contained
in each tuple. For each field, the fields
type and data length are first recorded to ensure accurate reconstruction
during deserilization. The data length is important
during desaliation for dynamically sized
fields like strings as it determines how
much data to read back. Finally, we write the
actual data of the field. This code snippet is a part of the alzation
function in bus DB. The four loop itrates over each tuple stored
in the tuple vector. Each tuple is accessed
by reference to avoid copying for
improved performance. The reinterpret cast
is used to cast num fields to a constant
character pointer as required by the right method. The nested four loop itrates over each field within
the current tuple. Similar to the tuple loop, it access each
field by reference. It first writes the type
of the field to the file. This type information
is used during dealiation to correctly
interpret the data. It then writes the length of the data stored in the field, which is crucial for variable length data
types like strings. This value helps ensure that exactly the right amount of data is read back during desaliation. Finally, it writes the actual data of the
field to the file. If the field data is a
dynamically allocated string, fielddata dot get provides a
pointer to the data array, and field data length specifies the number
of bytes to write, ensuring that all the fields
data is written correctly. Overall, this code
zippet effectively serializes each tuple into a binary format suitable
for disk storage, writing not only the data, but also the metadata like field count and
data length that is necessary for accurately
reconstructing the tuples during the de
seralization process.
 
 
Now that we know how to
serialize tuples to disk, let's next look at
how to transform on disk pages back to
in memory tuples. Desaliation in bus
DB involves reading the minor data from a file and reconstructing the
tuples accordingly. This starts with reading the number of tuples
contained in the page because that sets the foundation for reconstructing the in memory
structure of the page. The reconstruction of each tuple starts by determining the
number of fields it contains. This loop then iterates
through each field expected in a tuple with num fields indicating how many
fields to be read. Each field within a tuple is individually restored
by reading its type, data length, and
the actual data. We read the type of the
field from the binary file. The reinterpret cast is used to convert the
pointer to type to a character pointer as the read function takes a character pointer
as the first input. While reading the data, we first dynamically
allocate memory on the heap to store the fuse data. The memory is allocated to hold exactly data length characters. We then read data length
bytes of data from the file into the memory
pointed to by data. The data dot G function returns a pointer to the managed memory, allowing the read
function to write directly into the
allocated space. Once all the fields are
read and recreated, they are assembled back into their respective tuples
based on their data type, whether it's an integer,
float or a string. With all the fields correctly
desised and reassembled, the tuple is fully
reconstructed, marking the end of the desaliation process
for that tuple. Overall, desaliation turns
raw binary page data from a file on disk back to in memory tuples for
processing queries. In this way, desaliation enables accurate reconstruction of database tuples
from disk storage. We next focus on using
this page class in bus DB. Instead of managing
only in memory tuples, we now integrate
the serialization and dealiation
mechanisms into Bz DV. This allows us to write a page with tuples to disk and
read it back again, thus extending Bz
DB's functionality to support durable on
disk data storage. To recap in this lesson, we looked at how
the database system organizes tuples into pages. We also examined how BSD B serializes and de serializes pages to achieve persistence.
 
 
 
In this lesson, we will focus on simplifying the serialization
process within Bz DB. We will refactor bus DB to
simplify salisation and dealiation by
spreading the logic across the page tuple
and field classes. We will also introduce
a static method for dealiation in the page class
to improve efficiency. To simplify calization
in the page class, let us enhance the field class to handle its own calization. This method allows each
field type, whether string, integer or float to be serialized effectively
to an on disk format. By delegating the seralization responsibility
to the field class, we ensure that each
datatype is handled appropriately according
to its specific needs. Following the refactoring
of the field class, let us also update
the tuple class with its own calzation and
dealiation methods. This capability ensures
that each tuple can independently
manage the lization of its constituent fields. Note how the CLS function in the tuple class relies on the CLS function in
the field class, thereby spreading the iliation
logic across both classes. With the new
salization methods in place for field
and tuple classes, the page class write function
is greatly simplified. Now, the page class only needs
to manage the sequence of tuple salization without
really worrying about the intricacies of the salon
process for those tuples. We first serialize the number
of tuples in the pig and then loop through each tuple and invoke its
serialized function. By delegating the responsibility of Lization to the field
and tuple classes, we enhance the modularity
and maintainability of BSDB. This separation of
concerns not only makes the code cleaner
and easier to understand, but also allows for independent class updates
and improvements to the logic of fields and tuples without impacting the
broader page class logic. Let's next discuss about adding a static method for
desalization in the page class. Currently, during desalization,
we create a page object, page two and populate it
with the data from the file. There are two steps here, object creation followed
by data loading. We can streamline this
approach and merge object creation and data loading
into a single operation. In the next version of Bz DB, we introduce a new
static method called deserialize in the page class that is aimed at reconstructing
pages from disk. In C plus plus, methods can be classified into static
and instance methods. Static methods are used for functionalities that pertain
to the class as a whole, allowing them to be invoked without creating an
object of the class. In contrast, instance methods
are used to operate on unmodified data contained within a specific instance
of the class. The static decilize method facilitates direct
loading of tuples from disk data without the necessity to instantiate
a page object beforehand. This approach streamlines
the desyation process by eliminating the need for a temporary page
object and directly constructing the page with
its complete state as stored. Bz DB uses both static
and instance methods to manage page objects. It uses a static method for
creating a new page from disk data and an instance method for updating existing
page objects. In conclusion, in this lesson, we learned about simplifying the seriation process using
a more modular approach. We then discussed about static instance methods in C plus plus and how we can use a static method for
desaliation in bus DB.
 
In this lesson, we will discuss about how to support deletion of tuples and how to
ensure consistency between data in memory
and data on disk. Applications often
delete old tuples that are no longer needed. For instance, if a user deletes their account
in a social media app, then the tuples associated with that user must be deleted
from all the tables. We implement a delete tuple
method in the page class that removes a specific tuple based on its index
within the table, which is essentially
a vector of tuples. This function first checks if the provided index is within
the bounds of the vector. If the index is out of range, it prints an error
message and exits. If the index is valid, it decreases the use
size of the page by the size of the tuple being deleted and then removes
that tuple from the vector. We introduce logic to
selectively delete tuples to simulate data
life cycle management. In this code, we skip deletion once for every hundred
insertion attempts. This approach illustrates
the importance of periodic database
cleanup to ensure that the database system does not slow down due to outdated data. When a tuple is deleted from
a loaded page in memory, this change does not
immediately reflect on disk. If we deserialize
the page from disk, it shows the original
unchanged page. Here, loaded page two still contains the deleted
tuple at slot zero. This example highlights
a critical issue of persistence mismatch where in memory changes are
not synchronized back to disk leading to
data inconsistency. To resolve the issue
of data inconsistency, it is crucial to synchronize in memory
changes back to disc. So how do we resolve
this problem? After performing deletions or other updates in
the in memory page, we must trigger the
serialization process to write these changes to disk. This ensures that the data
on disk remains consistent. Here we see how to do
data synchronization. After deleting specific tuples at slots zero and
seven in the page, we serialize the page back to disk using
the right method. After desalization, the loaded page now
reflects these deletions. Loaded page two no
longer contains the deleted tuples at
slots zero and seven. Thus, this data synchronization
step is important for maintaining data
consistency between in memory and non disk data. As a recap, in this lesson, we covered the
fundamental aspects of tuple deletion and data synchronization
in database systems. The main idea is that every
change in memory made by a committed
transaction should be reflected on disk to
prevent data loss.
 
 
In this module, we learned about how the database system
stores database on disk. We discussed about
the differences between memory and disk. We then went over how file
IO operations in CPlus plus are important for saving and retrieving data from
database files on disk. We also discussed about
smart pointers and adopted them in the field
and tuple classes in Bus TB. We then focused on how data
synchronization is vital for maintaining data
consistency between in memory and on
disk database pages.